A Garland of Vajra Words
A Prayer to the Guru
by Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche

chok gi dangpo ku sum chang
Supreme and primordial holder of the three kāyas,
sangye tamché kyepa po
Father of all the buddhas,
ö chen nampar nangwar jé
Great beacon of light,
tsétayepa la chaktsal
Amitāyus, Source of Infinite Life: homage to you!

jam dang nyingjé kyilkhor chen
Brilliant moon of love and compassion,
dro küngawé mik dangden
Fondly looking after all beings,
mönlam yeshe gyatso té
Ocean of aspiration and wisdom,
jikten wangchuk la chaktsal
Lokeśvara, Lord of the World: homage to you!

palden sangye pema kyé
Glorious Lotus-Born Buddha,
künkhyen yeshe dzö dzinpa
Holder of the treasury of all-knowing wisdom,
gyalpo gyutrul natsok chang
Taking on magical appearance as a myriad of kings,
nangsi zilnön la chaktsal
Nangsi Zilnön, Prevailer over all that Appears and Exists: homage to you!

dorjé lé kyé dorjé dak
Born from the Vajra, you are the Vajra-Lord,
dorjé nyingpo kha drawa
Vajra in essence, like the sky,1
dorjé gyalpo dewa ché
Vajra King, Great Bliss,2
pema jungné la chaktsal
Pema Jungné, the Lotus-Born: homage to you!

paklam shintu to la né
Abiding on the heights of the noble path,3
dü sum sangye lejepa
Accomplishing the activity of the buddhas of the three times,4
gönpo semchen kün gyi chok
Protector, supreme amongst all beings,5
pema sambha la chaktsal
Padmasambhava, the Lotus-Born: homage to you!

mi shé dra yi drekpa jom
Slayer of enemies, haughty demons of ignorance,
loden gek chang pal dangden
Wise, graceful, and glorious,6
mawé sengé tsungpamé
Lion of speech, peerless one,7
loden choksé la chaktsal
Loden Choksé, Wise Seeker of the Sublime: homage to you!

gyutrul chenpo dön drubpa
Accomplisher of great magical creation,
gyutrul chenpö gawé ga
Delighting in the pleasure of great magical creation,
gyutrul chenpö miktrul chen
Illusionist of the great magical creation,8
pema gyalpo la chaktsal
Pema Gyalpo, Lotus King: homage to you!

sang ngak tsul chen lé jungwa
You have arisen from the great path of the secret mantra9
parol chin chu tobpa té
You have attained the ten perfections,10
dendön nampa chunyi den
You have realized the twelve aspects of the truth,11
nyima özer la chaktsal
Nyima Özer, Rays of the Sun: homage to you!

namdak pungpo nga changwa
Bearer of the five completely pure aggregates,12
ngejung kün gyi ta la né
You abide in the finality of complete renunciation,13
tubpa chenpo tub chenden
Great Sage, Great Muni,14
shakya sengé la chaktsal
Śākya Sengé, Lion of the Śākyas: homage to you!

zab ching gyaché dra drokpa
Proclaimer of the profound and vast,15
dorjé drakpo gawa ché
Fierce vajra, great delight,16
dakmé sengé dra dangden
Lion’s roar of selflessness,17
sengé dradrok la chaktsal
Sengé Dradok, Lion’s Roar: homage to you!

dü kyi pung nam pam jepa
Defeater of the armies of demonic forces,18
dorjé hung té hung shyé drok
Effecting the hūṃs of Vajrahūṃkāra,19
tsukpamé ching chewar drak
Impervious and greatly renowned,20
dorjé drolö la chaktsal
Dorjé Drolö, Wild Wrathful Vajra: homage to you!

rik sum changwa sang ngakchen
Lord of the three families, sovereign of secret mantra,21
dul ka dulwa nam kyi chok
Supreme subduer of the hard to tame,22
semchen tamché rab drol jé
Great liberator of all beings,23
tsokyé dorjé la chaktsal
Tsokyé Dorjé, Ocean Born Vajra: homage to you!

khyé la chaktsal soltab pé
By praying and paying homage to you,
dakchak yangdak dzokpa yi
May we actualize pristine, complete,
changchub dampa ngöngyur né
Perfect awakening
ten drö pal kün pel jé shok
And thus elevate the glory of the teachings and beings!
Drawing on citations from The Tantra of the Magical Net of Mañjuśrī,24 Maṅgala-Śrībhuti composed
this prayer in Tashi Palbar Ling,25 intending it to be a cause for the Second Buddha
to care for us throughout all our lifetimes. Virtue! Virtue! Virtue!

| Lhasey Lotsawa Translations, 2019. (Translated by Stefan Mang and Oriane Sherap Lhamo.) Revised
with many thanks to Anthony Tribe.
↑ The first two lines of verse 69 of The Chanting of the Names of Mañjuśrī (Tōh. 360, mañjuśrīnāmasaṃgīti,
‘jam dpal mtshan brjod). As the colophon states, Dilgo Khyentsé draws on citations
from the Nāmasaṃgīti. This and the following footnotes specify which lines Khyentsé
Rinpoche cites.↑ The second line of verse 71.↑ The third line of verse 80.↑ The fourth line
of verse 99.↑ The third line of verse 119.↑ The second and third lines of verse 120.↑
The fourth line of verse 101.↑ Lines two, three and four of verse 35.↑ The third line of verse
42.↑ The first line of verse 43.↑ The first line of verse 133.↑ The fourth line of verse
130.↑ The first line of verse 131.↑ A play on the Sanskrit word muni (thub pa), sage.
In Sanskrit the line reads mahāmauni-mahāmuni. The second line of verse 42.↑ The third line
of verse 77.↑ The third line of verse 71.↑ The third line of verse 47.↑ The third line of
verse 151.↑ The fourth line of verse 71.↑ The first line of verse 80.↑ The first line of
verse 65.↑ The second line of verse 1.↑ The four line of verse 119.↑ Otherwise known as The
Chanting of the Names of Mañjuśrī (Tōh. 360, mañjuśrīnāmasaṃgīti, ’jam dpal mtshan brjod).↑
Tashi Palbar Ling is the name of the retreat hermitage of Mipham Rinpoche (1846-1912).
Dilgo Khyentsé stayed in retreat at this site as well.