A History of Dzongsar Monastery

by Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche

Generally speaking, there are four great valleys (shod chen) in Dokham: Kyishöd (skyi shod),
Treshöd (tre shod), Meshöd (smad shod) and Tashöd (rta shod). Among these, in Meshöd, the
second most important of the twenty-five glorious Sakya monasteries under the control of
Derge is the one known as Dzongsar ('New Fortress'), so called because it was previously a
fortress of the Beri King. According to Kongtrul Rinpoche, the site was originally a Kadampa
settlement.

When Drogön Chögyal Pakpa of Sakya was returning to Tibet [from China] his party spent a day
camped at Tratang in Meshöd. He saw the need to establish Sakya monastery at the site, and
to that end offered an image of the Protector (i.e., Mahākāla) made from sandalwood, which
was a support for his own meditative practice. This was clearly stated by Jamgön Khyentse
Rinpoche. Chögyal Pakpa was active during the third calendrical cycle and we are now in
the sixteenth, so that shows how many years have passed in the interim.[1]

The histories of the Ngari and Gangna lama residences (bla brang) are not entirely clear to
me. The way in which the first Khyentse incarnation of the Dilgo family carried out his vast
activities while residing in the monks' quarters is well known.

I do not know the full extent of all the sacred items at the monastery. Within Khyentse Rinpoche's
residence the main images included a statue of the Buddha, Lord of Sages, from eastern
India, which had been a support for the first Khyentse's personal practice; the sublime
representation of the Guru known as Blazing Splendour of Attainments (dngos grub dpal 'bar),
a joint treasure revelation of Chokling and Khyentse; four Guru representative images—one
each for [the activities of] pacifying, enriching, magnetizing and wrathfully subjugating—signifying
Khyentse Rinpoche's status as the fifth kingly treasure-revealer (after his
passing the pacifying representative image went with Khyentse's sacred relics to the Palpung
Lhasarkhang temple at Palpung Monastery, where it now remains; the enriching representative
image is at Gönchen with the golden reliquary known as 'the Single Ornament of this
World'; the magnetizing and wrathfully subjugating representative images were placed within
Khyentse's reliquary stūpa and copper and gold statue at Dzongsar Monastery). There were
also some dhaikshiṃ representative images[2] offered by Nyenchen Tanglha, as stated in the
biography. I myself witnessed six or seven treasure caskets, both opened and unopened,
including the treasure casket that contained an image of Jambhala taken from Dzam Pema Shelpuk.[3]


Among the yellow scrolls were two folios of yellow paper from the Khandro Sangdü[4] as well
as several other folios from yellow scrolls.

Representatives of enlightened mind included a bronze five-spoked vajra, which was a mind support
for the Assembled Sugatas of the Three Roots (rtsa gsum bde gshegs 'dus pa); the skull
of the Nepali Vasudhara, revealed as a treasure by Chokgyur Lingpa; the skull of the dharma
king Trisong [Detsen]; the maroon skull of Tsari offered by Shingkyong Kunga Shönnu;[5]
a dagger (kīla) of meteoric iron offered by Kharak Dorje Khyungtsünma;[6] and a turquoise-coloured
soul-stone (bla rdo) of Damchen Dorje Lekpa featuring a naturally arisen image
of Damchen.

These are the objects that are clear in my mind. I don't now recall precisely the objects that
came into the possession of Chökyi Lodrö Rinpoche, the second Jamgön Khyentse incarnation.
I believe that the representations of enlightened body included more than fifty terma
statues in bronze of various sizes and that there were around ten representations of enlightened
mind, including vajras and kīlas.

I don't know what more to say. I could not clearly list all the successive Ngor khenpos at Dzongsar
Monastery. This is all that is stored in my mind.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2020.