A Sādhana of Golden Mañjughoṣa
by Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche

lama chok sum güpé kyab su ten
By respectfully relying on the Guru and Three Jewels as refuge,
dro kün dral chir jampal tö drub tü
And through the power of praising and accomplishing Mañjuśrī in order to liberate all beings,
semchen deden dukngal kün dangdral
May sentient beings enjoy happiness, be free from all kinds of suffering,
dé lé mi nyam tangnyom la né shok
Never be separated from happiness and abide in equanimity.
Repeat this three times. Then, recite “oṃ svabhāva..etc.”
om sobhawa shuddha sarwa dharma sobhawa shuddho ham
oṃ svabhāva śuddhāḥ sarvadharmāḥ svabhāva śuddho ‘haṃ
tong dang tenjung zungjuk chotrul lé
Arising from the unified display of emptiness and dependent origination,
né sum om ah hung dang dhih yik gi
Three places marked with oṃ āḥ hūṃ and syllable dhīḥ
chendrang dün khar jetsün jampé yang
Invoke noble Mañjughoṣa into the sky before me—
marser raldri char shying lekbam dzin
Orange in colour and holding a sword and volume of text.
dar dang rinchen gyen dzé kyiltrung gi
He wears jewel ornaments and silken garments and his two legs are crossed,
pé da la shyuk wangkur gyé dab gyur
As he sits upon a lotus and moon-disc, empowered and sealed.
tuk sok lé jung tö trin rik ngak treng
From his vital syllable arise clouds of praise and the mantra garland.
dak tim yeshe nangwa gyepar gyur
Dissolving into me and causing wisdom’s radiance to expand.
Repeat “Gang gi lodrö...etc” three times.
gang gi lodrö drib nyi trindral nyi tar namdak rabsalwé
Your wisdom is brilliant and pure like the sun, free from the clouds of the two obscurations.
jinyé dön kün jishyin zik chir nyi kyi tukkar lekbam dzin
You perceive the whole of reality, exactly as it is, and so hold the book of Transcendental
Wisdom at your heart.
gangdak sipé tsönrar marik mün tum dukngal gyi zirwé
You look upon all beings imprisoned within saṃsāra, enshrouded by the thick darkness of ignorance
and tormented by suffering,
dro tsok kün la bu chik tar tsé yenlak drukchü yangden sung
With the love of a mother for her only child. Your enlightened speech, endowed with sixty melodious
tones,
druk tar cher drok nyönmong nyi long lé kyi chak drok droldzé ching
Like the thundering roar of a dragon, awakens us from the sleep of destructive emotions and
frees us from the chains of karma.
marik münsel dukngal nyugu jinyé chödzé raldri nam
Dispelling the darkness of ignorance, you wield the sword of wisdom to cut through all our suffering.
döné dak ching sa chü tar sön yönten lü dzok gyalsé tuwö ku
Pure from the very beginning, you have reached the end of the ten bhūmis and perfected all enlightened
qualities. Foremost of the Buddha’s heirs,
chu trak chu dang chunyi gyen tré dak lö münsel jampé yang la dü
Your body is adorned with the hundred and twelve marks of enlightenment. To Mañjughoṣa, the
‘Gentle-voiced’, I prostrate, and pray: dispel the darkness from my mind!
om a ra pa tsa na dhih
oṃ arapacana dhīḥ
Repeat the mantra. Then, recite “Tseden khyé kyi ...etc”.
tseden khyé kyi khyen rab özer gyi
With all of your kindness and love, let your wisdom’s shining light
dak lö timuk münpa rabsal né
Clear the darkness of my ignorance, once and for all.
ka dang tenchö shyung luk tokpa yi
Grant me, I pray, the intelligence, the brilliance
lodrö pobpé nangwa tsal du sol
To understand the scriptures—the words of the Buddha and works of the masters.

gang tsé tawar döpa am
And whenever I wish to look upon you,
chungzé driwar dö na yang
Or ask of you anything at all,
gönpo jamyang khyé nyi ni
Lord and protector, Mañjughoṣa,
gek mepar yang tongwar shok
Let me see you without any hindrance!1

jampal shyönnu khyö kyi tukkyé dang
Just like the Youthful Mañjuśrī — in exalted intention,
dzepa mönlam khyen tsé nü pé tsul
Activities, aspirations, wisdom, love and capacity,
lamé yeshe gyutrul ji drawa
Whatever displays of unsurpassable wisdom there might be —
dendra khonar dak sok gyurwar shok
May I and other beings come to be exactly as he is.

When the great meditator Tsering Gyatso requested a chant text for students of National Dharma
Institute in Lhojong, I, Jigme Khyentse Özer (Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche), wrote this in the
main shrine of Kyerchu temple in Paro at sunrise on the tenth day of the seventh month.
May whoever makes a connection with this liturgy enjoy the splendor of wisdom radiance.

| Translated by Abraham Ta-Quan, 2019.
↑ Bodhicaryāvatāra, X.53