A Sādhana of Tārā Sarasvatī
by Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche

Refuge and Bodhicitta
namo, lama chok sum nyurma pal
Namo. In the guru, Three Jewels and swift and glorious Lady,
güpé kyab chi khanyam dro
I take refuge with devotion. To bring all beings, as vast as space in number,
lamé changchub chok tob chir
To supreme, unsurpassable awakening,
pakma yangchen drubpar gyi
I shall meditate on noble Sarasvatī.
Three times.
Visualization
ah, rangnyi kechik pé dé teng
A. Instantly, upon a lotus and moon disk seat,
yangchenma ni tön dé shyal
Appears Sarasvatī, whose face is the colour of the autumn moon.1
shyab nyi tabab kyilmo trung
She sits in relaxed, cross-legged posture.
chak yé chok jin yönpa ni
Her right hand is in the gesture of supreme generosity,
könchok sum tsön kyab jin gyé
Her left hand in the gesture of granting refuge, symbolizing the Three Jewels,
melong hrim tsen utpal dzin
And holding an utpala flower, on top of which is a mirror marked by hrīṃ,
özer tröpé gyal nam kyi
From which light rays radiate out,
khyen rab soso yangdak rik
Opening the treasure of intelligence—
karma tongtrak tsokpa té
Like the light of thousands of stars,
lodrö terkha jepar gyur
Of the omniscient, perfect knowledge of the victorious ones.
om pemo yogini taré tuttaré turé prajna hrim hrim soha
oṃ padmo-yoginī tāre tuttāre ture prajñā hrīṃ hrīṃ svāhā
Devote most of your time to reciting this mantra.
Then, if you wish to sharpen your intelligence, recite the three syllables alone:
hrim hrim hrim
hrīṃ hrīṃ hrīṃ
At dawn, fill a cup with pure water and purify it with the following mantra:
teyata | khali khali balité soha
tadyathā | khali khali balite svāhā
Then drinking the water will cause your intelligence to blaze like fire.

If you wish to stabilize your intelligence:
teyata | smriti mati prajna hurumé soha
tadyathā | smṛti mati prajñā hu ru me svāhā
Recite this many times. When you eat the pills at dawn, your intelligence will become very stable.

If you wish to increase the depth of your intelligence, focus your mind on a red syllable hrīḥ
blazing like a candle and recite the main mantra.2 Then focus on the sindūra and recite
the following:
om smriti mati gambhira hrih soha
oṃ smṛti mati gambhīra hrīḥ svāhā
Recite this many times and mix it with clarified butter. When you consume it your intelligence
will become as profound as a treasure from the oceans.

If you wish to vastly increase your intelligence, add the rejuvenation substance made from the
plant called ‘ever-weeping’3 to medicinal butter. Recite this mantra:
om maha mati prajna jnana huru huru bardhani soha
oṃ mahā-mati prajñā-jñāna huru huru vardhāni svāhā
and consume it at dawn, at which time you must avoid the consumption of harmful substances such
as meat, alcohol, garlic, onion and salt. Your intelligence will thereby become as vast
as the sky.

Recite the vowels and consonants, the mantra of interdependent origination, and the hundred-syllable
mantra.
Offerings
metok dukpö marmé dri
I present both material offerings and those created by the mind,
shyalzé rolmo lasokpa
Such as flowers, incense, lights, perfume, food, and music,
ngöjor yi kyi trul né bul
To the assembly of exalted deities:
pakmé tsok kyi shyé su sol
Accept them, I pray!

shyingkham dorjé sa shyi la
Clouds of offerings containing a pure realm, its ground made of vajras,
ling shyi rirab chöpé trin
And including the four continents and Mount Meru;
rabjam samyé gyen treng bar
A splendid garland of offerings, infinite and inconceivable,
drolma gyalwa kün yum mar
I present with utmost devotion to you, Tārā—
chok tu depé dak gi bul
Mother of all the buddhas.
Offer with:
arya taré sapariwara argham padam pupé dhupé aloké gendhé nevidé shapta pratitsaya soha
ārya-tārā saparivāra arghaṃ pādyaṃ puṣpe dhūpe āloke gandhe naivedye śabda pratīcchaya svāhā
Praise
chaktsal tönké dawa küntu
Homage to you whose countenance is like
gangwa gya ni tsekpé shyal ma
A hundred full moons gathered in autumn,
karma tongtrak tsokpa nam kyi
Smiling and glowing with brilliant radiance,
rabtu chewé ö rab bar ma
Like a thousand stars clustered, ablaze.4
Each time, recite this verse four hundred times. Then recite the hundred-syllable mantra.
If you wish to carry out the dissolution and re-emergence:
nöchü ö shyu rang la tim
The environment and beings within it melt into light and dissolve into me.
deyang mimik ösal ngang
I dissolve into referenceless luminosity.

pamo nangtong chenpor shar
The heroic lady arises as the great union of appearance and emptiness,
mitün chok kün sungwar gyur
Protecting us from all adversity.
benza raksha
vajra-rakṣa
Dedication and Aspiration
gewa di yi nyurdu dak
Through the positivity and merit of this, may I swiftly
drayang lhamo drub gyur né
Attain the realization of the goddess Sarasvatī, and thereby
drowa chik kyang malüpa
Every single sentient being
dé yi sa la göpar shok
Reach her state of perfection too.

Having received the blessing from several kind masters, each of whom was compassionately cared
for by the Noble Lady in person, I, Dorje Maṅgala who delights the daughter of Brahma,5
took this from the Inner Female Practice of the Heart Essence of the Vast Expanse (Longchen
Nyingtik Yumka) and compiled a daily practice with self-visualization. May all beings gain
glorious mastery of the intelligence of the perfect knowledges!

| Translated by Han Kop with the kind assistance of Tulku Dawa Zangpo, reviewed by Stefan Mang
and edited by Barry Cohen, 2021, for the Longchen Nyingtik Project.