All Wishes Swiftly Fulfilled
A Prayer to the Mahāguru of Uḍḍiyāna in Eight Chapters
by Dilgo Khyentsé Rinpoche

om ah hung bendza guru pema siddhi hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra-guru-padma siddhi hūṃ

Chapter One
om yik chimé yeshe dorjé ku
Oṃ is the vajra body of deathless wisdom.
ah ni künkhyab chöying dorjé sung
Āḥ is the vajra speech of the all-pervasive dharmadhātu.
hung shyé dechen mingyur dorjé tuk
Hūṃ is the vajra mind of unchanging great bliss.
orgyen lobpön chenpor solwa deb
Great Master of Uḍḍiyāna, to you we pray!

benza trödral chöying kadak khar
Vajra is the ever-pure citadel of the dharmadhātu free from complexity,1
guru dechen khur chi tötreng nga
Guru is the five skull-garlanded buddhas2 laden with great bliss,
pema kyöndral rangjung sangye nyi
Padma is the immaculate, self-arisen second Buddha,3
ku sum yermé lamar solwa deb
Guru of three kāyas indivisible, to you we pray!

siddhi tünmong lam gyur rigdzin shyi
Siddhi, by accomplishing the common path’s four vidyādhara stages
drub lachi nang sangwé barché shyi
And pacifying outer, inner, and secret obstacles,
yishyin döpé dön kün drubpa yi
All our wishes are fulfilled, just as we desire, thus
hung shyé yeshe tikler yermé dzö
Hūṃ—merge us indivisibly with the wisdom bindu!
This concludes the first chapter, which joins a prayer to the three-kāya guru with the vajra
vidyā-mantra.4

Chapter Two
om ni gyalwa gonggyü kuntuzang
Oṃ is Samantabhadra’s wisdom transmission to the buddhas.
ah shyé dagyü rigdzin gyutrul dra
Āḥ is the Magical Net’s5 symbolic transmission to the vidyādharas.
hung shyé nyengyü shingta pema jung
Hūṃ is the chariot of Padmasambhava’s aural transmission.
gyü sum palgön lamar solwa deb
Glorious lord, guru of the three transmissions, to you we pray!

benza tantra sang ngak lamé lam
Vajra is the unsurpassed path of tantra, the Secret Mantra.
guru yidam khandro shyitrö gar
Guru is the dance of peaceful and wrathful gurus, yidams, and ḍākinīs.
pemé treng tar samyé gang dulchen
Padma, you appear like a garland of lotuses in limitless ways.
rabjam kyilkhor khyabdak solwa deb
Universal lord of infinite maṇḍalas, to you we pray!

pakyé kater mengak gyatsö dzö
Treasury of an immeasurable ocean of teachings, terma and pith instructions,
siddhi jnana drubpé sang lam ché
Siddhi is the jñāna accomplished by the great secret path,
ten dang dé dzin pelgyé mitün shyi
The flourishing of these teachings and their holders; all hindrances pacified,
hung yik khyabdak dorjé sem drub shok
Hūṃ, may we accomplish Vajrasattva, the universal lord!
This concludes the second chapter, which joins a prayer to the marvelous teaching of the buddhas
with the vajra vidyā-mantra.

Chapter Three
om ni tingsal shyönnu bumpé ying
Oṃ is the utterly clear space of the youthful vase.
ah yik gar wang dechen gawé shying
Āḥ is the joyous realm of the Lord of Dance’s6 great bliss.
hung shyé rangnang khachö pema ö
Hūṃ is our own perception of the heavenly palace of Lotus Light.7
ku sum shying gi dakpor solwa deb
Lord of the three-kāya buddha fields, to you we pray!

benza ying kyi shyalyé khang chenpor
Vajra basic space is the vast mansion within which the
guru orgyen gang dul köpa ché
Guru of Uḍḍiyāna shows his great taming display.
pema jungné püntsok ngepa nga
Padmasambhava, born with the five perfect certainties,
ten dang tönkhor ché la solwa deb
Realm, teacher and retinue, to you we pray!

siddhi dorjé lam tar ma sön na
Siddhi, if we have not reached the end of the vajra path,
dakpé né der kechik kyé né kyang
May we still instantly be reborn in your pure realm,
barché mepar shyal tong lungten né
Gaze upon your face directly and receive your prophecy.8
hung yik pejung yeshe ro chik shok
Hūṃ, may we experience the single taste of Lotus-Born wisdom!
This concludes the third chapter, which joins a prayer to the “south of the western setting
sun”9 with the vajra vidyā-mantra.

Chapter Four
om ni dangpö sangye küntu chang
Oṃ is the primordial buddha, Samantabhadra.10
ah shyé tötreng gyutrul rik chok nga
Āḥ is the five supreme skull-garlanded families of the Magical Net.
hung yik mijé tönpa tso lé kyé
Hūṃ is the lake-born teacher of this world of Endurance.11
drukden gyüpé lamar solwa deb
Holder of the six transmissions,12 to you we pray!

benza gyutrul gyü dang drubdé gyé
Vajra is the Magical Net tantra13 and the Eight Pronouncements.14
guru yeshe gong long chik tu khyil
Guru is the all-inclusive expanse of wisdom consciousness.
pema tötreng ngödrub gyatsö ter
Skull-garlanded Padma, you are an ocean-vast treasury of siddhis,
sangye nyipé shyab la solwa deb
At the feet of the Second Buddha, we pray!

siddhi jnana tiklé chik gi dang
Siddhi is the single sphere of jñāna, and its radiance
lha ngak yeshe rolmor dakpé tü
Is the pure display of deity, mantra and wisdom.
zungdzin trulpé münpa rangsang né
May its power naturally clear the darkness of dualistic delusion,
hung shyé yeshe long du nyimé shok
Hūṃ, becoming non-dual within the expanse of wisdom!
This concludes the fourth chapter, which joins a prayer to un-elaborated great bliss with the
vajra vidyā-mantra.

Chapter Five
om yik chimé gönpo ö tayé
Oṃ is the Lord of Deathlessness, Amitābha.
ah ni sung gi dorjé pekar chang
Āḥ is Vajra Speech, White Lotus Bearer, Avalokiteśvara.
hung shyé gangchen tönpa dü sum khyen
Hūṃ is the Snowy Land’s teacher, who knows all three times, Padmasambhava.
gyal kün yeshe chikdü la solwa deb
Single embodiment of the wisdom of all victors, to you we pray!

benza kaya chimé tso lé trung
Vajra-kāya immortal who took birth amidst the waters,
guru dechen namtar sam lé dé
Guru of great bliss, your life activities are inconceivable!
pema tar dzé ngotsar dzepa yi
Padma-like in beauty are your deeds filled with marvels,
chunyi dendön dak la solwa deb
You who embody the twelve syllables’ meaning, to you we pray.15

siddhi khyé dang yermé changchub chir
Siddhi—in order to awaken inseparably from you,
soldeb dungwé shuk kyi deng kul na
We invoke you with this fervent prayer:
nyikmé gü shyi pendé pal chöpé
May the troubles of these difficult times be quelled, the glories of happiness and bliss be
enjoyed,
hung yik sangwa chenpor changchub shok
Hūṃ, great secret, may we awaken to you!
This concludes the fifth chapter, which joins a prayer to the great Sindhu Ocean16 with the
vajra vidyā-mantra.

Chapter Six
om yik khakhyab namkha dorjé ku
Oṃ is the space-like vajra body extending everywhere.
ah ni künkhyab nampa tamché sung
Āḥ is the variegated speech pervading everything.
hung shyé khyen tsé nü pé tsalden tuk
Hūṃ is the mind all-knowing, loving, and powerful in compassion.
yermé dorjé lamar solwa deb
Guru of the vajras indivisible, to you we pray!

benza mizé gyen gyi khorlö ying
Vajra is the basic space of the inexhaustible adornment wheel.
guru sangye kün nyam trinlé la
Guru is the activity of you, who are equal to all buddhas.
pema lé trung kyöndral yönten dzok
Padma-born, immaculate, with qualities complete,
tsungmé kadrinchen la solwa deb
Matchless teacher of immeasurable kindness, to you we pray!

siddhi khyé kyi dzepa tukkyé dang
Siddhi is your care motivated by compassion,
nyisumepar kalzang dak jor la
From which we of excellent fortune are inseparable.
dul ka dulwé trinlé namkha si
Your awakened activity in taming us, so hard to tame, endures like space.
hung yik tak khyab lhündrub dzé du sol
Hūṃ, please always, everywhere, spontaneously care for us!
This concludes the sixth chapter, which joins a prayer to the small Sindhu Ocean with the vajra
vidyā-mantra.

Chapter Seven
om yik tashi jewé jungné ché
Oṃ is the great source of infinite kinds of auspiciousness.
ah shyé nang ta chimé rigdzin tsul
Āḥ is Amitābha, in the form of the deathless vidyādhara.
hung gi nangsi zilnön dechen gyal
Hūṃ is the King of Great Bliss who prevails over all existence,
orgyen yishyin norbur solwa deb
Wish-fulfilling jewel of Uḍḍiyāna, to you we pray!

benza dön gyi yeshe yermé kyang
Vajra, ultimate wisdom, is non-dual, and yet
guru samdön drub dzé kü köpa
Guru displays in forms that fulfill all of our wishes.
pema gyalpo chusum nying né dren
Padma king, I remember you, with your thirteen manifestations,17
samdön lhün gyi drubpar solwa deb
Effortlessly fulfill our wishes, we pray!

siddhi dechen mingyur denyi dang
Siddhi is the unchanging great bliss, from which we’re inseparable,
nyimé changchub bardu mitün shyi
While disharmonies are pacified, up until awakening.
dögü dön kün bemé drubpa yi
Hūṃ, we call for the effortless fulfillment of all wishes and goals,
hung shyé kul shyin samdön kün drub dzö
In so doing, may all of our wishes be fulfilled!
This concludes the seventh chapter, which joins a prayer for the fulfillment all wishes (Sampa
Lhundrupma) with the vajra vidyā-mantra.

Chapter Eight
om yik chöku nang ta tsepakmé
Oṃ is the dharmakāya, Amitāyus of Infinite Light.
ah shyé longku drodul chenrezik
Āḥ is the sambhogakāya, Avalokiteśvara, Tamer of Beings.
hung gi nangsi zilnön pema jung
Hūṃ is Padmasambhava, Prevailer over All Existence.
ku sum lamar shyeng la solwa deb
Three-Kāya Guru, to you we pray!

benza dhuti dendön gawé zuk
Vajra-dhūti,18 in its true significance, takes the delightful forms of the
gurü namtrul rigdzin chu dang nyi
Guru, manifesting as the twelve vidyādharas.19
pema gyutrul drawé tsok kün la
Padma, to you, embodiment of the assembly the Magical Net’s deities,
miché depé dungwé solwa deb
With fierce devotion and unwavering faith, we pray!

siddhi lé shyi drub gyé nekab dang
Siddhi is attaining the four activities, the eight temporary accomplishments,
tartuk chakgya chenpö sar jor la
And the ultimate, the level of mahāmudrā.
chi nang sangwé barché shyiwa dang
To do so, may we pacify all outer, inner and secret obstacles and
hung yik yeshe tikler ro chik shok
Hūṃ—experience indivisibility—one taste—within the wisdom bindu!
This concludes the eighth chapter, which joins a prayer for dispelling all obstacles on the
path (Barché Lamsel) with the vajra-like vidyā-mantra.

Thus, upon the banks of the gently flowing Machu river, in a medicinal meadow at the foot of
the sacred mountain of Manyen, in order to invoke the awakened mind of Padma, the self-arisen
buddha, the subject who delights the Lake-Born Guru, Padma Ösal Dongak Lingpa Jikmé Khyentsé
Özer, composed this by joining prayers to the naturally-arisen secret vajra vidyā-mantra,
in accordance with the enlightened meaning of these vajra words. May the blessings
of the ultimate wisdom lineage dissolve into the nectar of one’s heart!

| Translated by Lhasey Lotsawa Translations (Stefan Mang and Peter Woods), 2020.
↑ The dharmakāya.↑ The saṃbhogakāya emanations of Guru Padmasambhava as the five buddhas.↑ The
nirmaṇakāya.↑ A vidyā-mantra (rig sngags), in this case the vajra-guru mantra, is a key
means to attain awakening.↑ The Magical Net (māyājāla, sgyu ’phrul) refers to the hundred
peaceful and wrathful saṃbhogakāya deities as described in the Guhyagarbha tantra.↑ Lord
of Dance (narteśvara, gar dbang) is an epithet for Avalokiteśvara.↑ The pure land palace
of Padmasambhava, rising on the peak of Copper-Colored Mountain.↑ The prophecy of where and
when we will attain awakening.↑ This is the southwestern direction where Padmasambhava’s
pureland is found.↑ Both Samantabhadra and Vajradhara are suggested by this term.↑ ‘Endurance’
(sahā, mi mjed) is the name for the present universe in which we live.↑ The six lineages
(drug ldan brgyud pa) of the Nyingma tradition are: 1) the mind-direct lineage of the
victorious ones (rgyal ba dgongs), 2) the sign lineage of the vidyādharas (rig 'dzin brda),
3) the aural lineage of realized beings (gang zag snyan), 4) the ḍākinī’s seal of entrustment
lineage (mkha' 'gro gtad rgya), 5) the lineage empowered by aspiration (smon lam dbang
bskur), 6) the lineage of prophetically declared succession (bka' bab lung bstan). While
1) - 3) remain constant, listings of the following three lineages vary. Following Dan Martin,
this list is drawn from Mkhyen rab rgya mtsho 1557 (1981) 256.4.↑ That is the Guhyagarbha
tantra.↑ Kagyé (bka’ brgyad).↑ This line could also imply that Guru Rinpoché embodies
the twelve aspects of the meaning of truth (bden don rnam pa bcu gnyis), that is the purified
states of the twelve links of dependent origination.↑ Padmasambhava’s birth place.↑
The thirteen manifestations of Guru Padmasambhava according to the Sampa Lhundrupma cycle
of teachings.↑ According to Lama Öpak, Vajra-dhūti here likely refers to the vajra-body (rdo
rje’i lus) with an emphasis being placed on its channels.↑ The twelve manifestations of
Guru Padmasambhava according to the Barché Lamsel cycle of teachings.