Beautiful Clouds of Blessings
A Prayer to the Lineage Masters of the Heart Essence of the Vast Expanse from the Great Perfection
by Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche

kunzang dorjé sempa garab jé
Samantabhadra, Vajrasattva, Garab Dorje,
jampal shenyen shiri singha dang
Mañjuśrīmitra, Śrī Siṃha,
jnanasutra penchen bimalar
Jñānasūtra and the great paṇḍita Vimalamitra—
solwa deb so dak gyü jingyi lob
To you I pray: bless my mind!

tsokyé dorjé jebang drok sum dang
Lake-Born Vajra, the King, subject and friend,1
künkhyen chöjé rigdzin jikme ling
The omniscient Lord of Dharma Rigdzin Jigme Lingpa,
gyalwé nyugu drinchen lama la
Gracious guru 'Gyalwe Nyugu’—
solwa deb so dak gyü jingyi lob
To you I pray: bless my mind!
Supplement
After the Omniscient Jigme Lingpa, add the following:
trinlé özer gyalwé nyugu dang
Trinle Özer, Gyalwe Nyugu,
namkhé dorjé shyenpen tayé shyab
Namkhe Dorje,2 Shenpen Tayé,
yeshe dorjé chö kyi wangpo la
Yeshe Dorje,3 Chökyi Wangpo—4
solwa deb so dak gyü jingyi lob
To you I pray: bless my mind!

pema benza jamyang khyentsé wang
Pema Vajra, Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo,
pema losal tendzin norbü shyab
Pema Losal,5 Tendzin Norbu,6
pema dechen zangpo tenpé nyi
Pema Dechen Zangpo,7 Tenpe Nyima—
solwa deb so dak gyü jingyi lob
To you I pray: bless my mind!

natsok rangdrol jampal tendzin dang
Natsok Rangdrol,8 Jampal Tendzin,
pema gyepa künga paldang den
Pema Gyepa,9 Künga Palden,10
chökyi lodrö khyentsé özer la
Chökyi Lodrö, Khyentse Özer—
solwa deb so dak gyü jingyi lob
To you I pray: bless my mind!
I, Jigme Khyentse Özer,11 offer these prayers to the succession of masters from whom I have
received such kindness.
dadral khedrub gyatsö jesu zung
Cared for by an ocean of masters, unrivalled in their learning and accomplishment,
rimé tubpé ten la tö sam dzé
You studied and contemplated impartially on the Teachings of the Sage
ten dror lhakpé sem kyi gocha chen
Armoured with the altruistic wish to benefit the teachings and beings—
jikme khyentsé özer la solwa deb
Jigme Khyentse Özer, I supplicate you.
This was written by myself12 to fulfil the request of some devoted disciples.

ngejung changchub sem kyi trishing la
Bless me so that the vine of renunciation and bodhicitta
namdak wang shyi dütsi rekpa lé
Is touched by the nectar of the four authentic empowerments,
kyedzok drubpé utpal gyepa dang
Whereby the utpala flower of the practices of the generation and completion phase may blossom
ku shyi drebu minpar jingyi lob
And ripen into the fruit of the four kāyas!

by Shyönnu Abhaya.

| Translated by Han Kop, 2021, for the Longchen Nyingtik Project.

Source: 'Jigs med gling pa. "klong chen snying thig gi bla brgyud gsol 'debs gsung rgyun ma",
in klong chen snying thig rtsa pod. 5 Vols. BDRC W1KG13585. Bodhnath, Kathmandu and Bodhgaya,
Bihar: Shechen Publications, 1994. Vol. 4: 9–10.

Version: 1.0-20210618
↑ I.e., King Trisong Detsen, Vairocana and Yeshe Tsogyal.↑ Mingyur Namkhe Dorje, 1793–1870↑
Do Khyentse Yeshe Dorje, 1800–1866↑ Patrul Rinpoche, 1808–1887↑ Possibly Khenpo Jigme Pema
Losal from Dzogchen Monastery, who taught Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö and Dilgo Khyentse
Rinpoche.↑ Most likely Orgyen Tendzin Norbu https://treasuryoflives.org/biographies/view/Orgyen-Tendzin-Norbu/7551↑
Most likely the Third Mura Tulku Pema Dechen Zangpo of Kilung
Monastery.↑ Possibly Adzom Drukpa Drodul Pawo Dorje (1842–1924)↑ Possibly Tubten Pema Gyepé
Nyinjé (19th century), a student of Orgyen Tendzin Norbu.↑ Derge Lama Jadralwa Kunga Palden,
1878–1944.↑ I.e., Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche.↑ I.e., Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche.