Bestowing the Glory of Wisdom
A Gaṇacakra Feast for Nyingtik Saldrön
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

To the guru, intrinsic awareness, sovereign of great bliss, lord of the maṇḍala, I bow down!
For this profound guru yoga, I shall now present the gaṇacakra feast offering, “Bestowing
the Glory of Wisdom”.
Yogins who have received empowerment and who possess faith and pure samaya, should arrange whatever
samaya substances they have, including madāna and bāla, and sprinkle them with water
and wine.
ram yam kham chi nö dechen kapala
Raṃ yaṃ khaṃ! Outer appearance is the kapāla of great bliss;
nang chü yeshe tsok tor ché
Within it, all beings are the great feast tormas1 of wisdom.
zagmé dütsi trinchen po
Objects of desire multiply as great clouds of stainless amṛta,
döyön namkha khyapar pel
Increasing until they fill the sky.
om ah hung ha ho hrih
oṃ āḥ hūṃ ha ho hrīḥ
Three times
Inviting the field of merit
ku sum shing kham rabjam né
From the infinite pure realm of the three kāyas,
lama yidam khandrö tsok
Come, assemblies of gurus, devas and ḍākinīs.
dir shek tsok la jin chen pop
Rain blessings upon this gaṇacakra.
naljor rigpé nyamtok por
Heighten this yogin’s experience and realisation of awareness.
tsa lung tigler jinlop la
Bless nāḍī, prāṇa and bindu,
chok dang tünmong ngödrup tsol
And bestow supreme and ordinary siddhis.
om maha guru benza samadzah dzah hung bam hoh
There are three sections to the feast offering. First, offer the first portion:
om ah hung lamé tsok kyi chöpa ni
Oṃ āḥ hūṃ! These unexcelled gaṇacakra offerings are
yeshe nam ngé özer tro
Radiant with the five wisdom lights;
lama ku shi kyilkhor nam
May the maṇḍalas of the guru’s four kāyas
tsok kyi chöpé nyé gyur chik
Be pleased by this offering of gaṇacakra.
In between, repair with confession:
hung hrih omin sang chok shing kham cher
Hūṃ! Hrīḥ! In the great supreme secret buddha field of Akaniṣṭha,
ying kyi bhendha gya ré yang
Within the bhāṇḍa2 of all-pervading space,
tsok tor döyön chü ré ché
The feast tormas and offerings are excellent,
naljor rigpa dang ré tro
And the yogin’s awareness is clear and joyful.
rik tsal kunzang kha khyap trin
Awareness-display pervades the sky as an offering cloud of Samantabhadra,
chi nang sang chö pagyé kyi
Making limitless outer, inner, and secret offerings
lama ku shi lha tsok nam
To the devas of the guru’s four kāyas;
tukdam nyenpo gyepar kang
The deities are pleased and their wishes fulfilled.
dakchak mishé timukpé
Unwholesome actions, obscurations, faults and downfalls,
sakpé dik drip nyé tung kün
Accumulated through my ignorance and stupidity,
damdzé tsok kyi chöpé shak
I confess through this feast offering of samaya substances;
dak ching tsangpar tsal du sol
Please grant me purification!
benza samaya a
vajra samaya aḥ
Recite the hundred-syllable mantra. Finally, perform the liberation:
é ying barwé hom khung du
Into the triangular blazing dungeon of the space of E,
nyidzin tokpé rutra kuk
I summon the rudra, dualistic thought;
dagmé purbü tsön gyi dral
Liberating it with the kīla of egolessness,
yeshe rap bar shal du tap
I offer it to the mouth of intensely blazing wisdom.
matram rutra maraya bé idam balingta kha kha kha hi
Seeing the aggregates, elements and sense-fields as deities, jñāna enjoys jñāna. After enjoying
the gaṇacakra:
hoh rigdzin lamé lha tsok la
Hoḥ! Assemblies of vidyādhara gurus—
tsok kyi chöpa pulwa yi
Through offering this gaṇacakra,
dak shen drowa malü pa
May I, and all beings without exception,
kyilkhor chiktu drupar shok
Attain accomplishment within one maṇḍala.
Thus make a prayer of aspiration. Having collected the remainders, sprinkle them with mouth-rinsing
water:
pem lhak la wangwé ka nyen dé
Phaiṃ! Attendants entitled to the remainder—
khandro ging lang wangchugma
Ḍākinīs, gings3, langkaras and īśvarīs,
ma dün sing shi barma sok
Seven Mothers, Four Sisters, barmas and the rest—
lhaktor shé la trinle drup
Enjoy the remainder and accomplish your appointed activities!
utsita balingta kha hi
If you like, perform vajra songs and dances. Afterwards offer the torma of the covenant:
hung hrih gyü sum rigdzin lama yi
Hūṃ! Hrīḥ! You protectors bound by oath
dam la takpé sungma nam
By the gurus of the three lineages—
men rak dütsi gyepa kyé
Be pleased with these nectars of amṛta and rakta;
dra gek sha trak torma shé
Accept this torma of the obstacle makers’ flesh and blood;
mitün galkyen barché drol
Liberate unfavourable circumstances and obstacles;
zap ter tenpa gyepa dang
Cause the teachings of the profound treasures to spread,
cholwé trinle drupar dzö
And perform the activities we request of you!
samaya amrita rakta balingta kha hi
samaya amṛta rakta baliṃ te khāhi
Offer the stirred rinse water to the Tenmas:
joh tendrel chunyi né dakpé
Bhyoḥ! The innate purity of the twelve interdependent links
den dön nampa chunyi zuk
Arises in the form of the twelve aspects of truth;
pö kyong tenma chunyi tsok
You twelve Tenmas, protectresses of the world—
dir jön tormé shal chu shé
Come here and receive the torma’s rinse water.
cholwé lé nam drupar dzö
Accomplish your appointed activities,
jikten dewé trinlé pel
Increase the happiness of the world,
taktu sung shing kyopar dzö
And at all times keep guard and protect!
ma ma hring hring balingta kha hi
ma mā hrīṃ hrīṃ baliṃ te khāhi
Turning the torma container upside down, perform the vajra mudrā of subjugation.
hung dorjé guk che chenpo yi
Hūṃ! The great vajra commander
dam si tamché kug né kyang
Gathers all you violators of samaya;
rirab barwé og tu nen
Burying you beneath blazing Mount Meru,
nam yang dangwar ma gyur chik
Never shall you rise again!
yama damsi tvam bhayanam
For the conclusion of the sādhana, there is offering, praise and receiving of siddhis:
hoh rigdzin lamé lha tsok la
Hoḥ! Before this divine assembly of vidyādhara gurus,
chi nang sangwé chöpa bul
I present the outer, inner and secret offerings;
yul dang wangpo nyimé rol
Within the realm of non-fixation, free from acceptance and rejection,
pang lang dzindral ngang du shé
Accept this non-dual enjoyment of objects and senses.
om benza argham padam pupé dhupé aloké gendhé nevidé shapda rupa shapda gendhé rasa parshé maha
amrita rakta balingta kha hi
hung hrih rangjung ösal ngang lé mayö kyang
Hūṃ! Hrīḥ! Never departing from the realm of self-existing luminosity,
magak rolpa longchö dzokpeku
You manifest the unceasing saṃbhogakāya,
tukje gang dul tulkü lha tsok la
And the all-taming deities of the compassionate nirmāṇakāya;
miyo nyampa chenpö töpar gyi
With unchanging great equanimity, I praise you.
om ah hung rigdzin lamé tugdam dü la bap
Oṃ āḥ hūṃ! The time has come to fulfil the aspirations of the vidyādhara gurus.
detong yeshe chenpö go ché la
By opening the door of the great wisdom of bliss-emptiness,
chok dang tünmong ngödrup malüpa
Grant and stabilise right now, without exception,
danta nyi du tsal shing tenpar dzö
All supreme and ordinary siddhis!
om ah hung benza maha guru kaya waka tsitta sarva siddhi pala hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra mahā guru kāya vāk citta sarva siddhi phala hūṃ4
Receive the accomplishments, then confess wholeheartedly. If you have a support for the invited
deities, perform the ritual requesting them to remain:
Receive the empowerments and gather and dissolve the visualization as in the main section.

Dedication and Aspiration
dak sok kha nyam drowa kün
May I and all beings numerous as the sky is vast,
kyé kün gurü5 jesu zung
Be accepted by the guru in all our lives.
mindrol dütsi gyü chuk té
May our mindstreams be rich with the nectar of maturation and liberation,
ku shi gopang nyur top shok
And may we all swiftly attain the level of the four kāyas.

Verses of Auspiciousness
gyü sum lamé trinpung trik
From the dense rain-clouds of the gurus of the three lineages,
yidam ngödrup drang char bep
Devas pour down siddhis
khandro chökyong druk dra drok
Amidst the roaring thunder of ḍākinīs and dharmapālas.
si shi gé tsen gyé gyur chik
May the virtues of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa flourish!
With these prayers of auspiciousness, continue integrating practice into your daily life.

In response to a request supported by gifts from Yudrön, princess of Derge, and at the urging
of Maṅgala, the all-knowing Choktrul Rinpoche,6 who said this would be good to write, I,
the one known as Jamyang Lodrö Gyatso or Pema Yeshe Dorje, spoke this immediately and Choktrul
Rinpoche wrote it down. May this cause great waves of twofold accumulation to develop
within our own and others’ mindstreams. Sarvadā kalyāṇam bhavatu!

| © Rigpa Translations, 2009. Edited and adapted for Lotsawa House, 2020.

Source: 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "tshogs mchod ye shes dpal ster/" in ’Jam dbyangs chos
kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. W1KG12986 Vol. 10: 117–122
↑ Torma: (Skt.: balingta), stylized food offerings usually in the shape of a cone or pyramid,
adorned with small and large 'buttons' and of various colours. Often the shape of a torma
is deity specific. During certain Vajrayāna initiations the torma is used to represent the
deity.↑ Tib. bhandha. Skt. bhāṇḍa. A “vessel” or “cup” but in a ritual context can also
mean skull-cup.↑ attendants, musicians and dancers↑ An alternative version of this mantra
in Dilgo Khyentse's collected works ends with 'hoḥ' instead of 'hūṃ'↑ An alternative version
uses 'lamé'↑ i.e., Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche