Calling the Guru from Afar
by the Seventh Shechen Rabjam Rinpoche

khyen rab yeshe barwé zi ö dang
The brilliant radiance of sublime knowledge and wisdom,
künkhyab tsewa chenpö rang dang lé
Along with its all-pervading self-radiance of great love,
gyal kün trinlé rang zuk tso lé kyé
Appeared as the activity of all the victorious buddhas, the Lake-Born Lord,
nyimé jamgön rabsal dawar dü
Who is inseparable from the gentle protector, Rabsel Dawa—to you, I bow.

gön khyé ring né rangjung dzok sangyé
Protector, you have ever been the natural and most perfect Buddha,
ngaden shying du dechen ku ngé trin
And the clouds of the five blissful families gathered within your fivefold field –
sé ché gyalwé gyutrul sam mikhyab
The magical manifestations of the buddhas and their children defy the imagination,
dengdir khedrub jewé chöpen khyé
Yet here you chose to appear in a form that would adorn the crowns of the learned and spiritually
accomplished in their millions.

tongwé yitrok tsenpé zi barwa
Seeing the radiance of your attractive and beautiful form, ablaze with its major and minor marks
of perfection,
dzé ji ö kyi dé tsal wangmé trün
Shining brightly, the garden of faith effortlessly came to life
kalzang kang druk rol né gawé tsal
And we fortunate bees enjoyed a veritable pleasure grove –
duwa nam shyi dreltsé dönden khyé
Attracting disciples with four activities, you brought great meaning to whomever you met.

lek sung özer tong gi drawa yi
The brilliant play of a thousand lights that was your eloquent speech
yün ring nyalwé mong mün tar dzé né
Brought the long dark slumber of ignorance to an end.
zab yang shejé né la chikchar du
And you bestowed the joy of confident intelligence
lodrö pobpé gawa ter dzé khyé
That understands profound and vast subjects simultaneously.

kadak ösal riktong gekmö khar
In the space of the seductress, aware yet empty, primordially pure and luminous,
dechen nyamgyé gyé nyi gemö lü
With a song of joy, you brought about the experiences of sixteen-fold great bliss.
tré tsé rangdrol ngotsar tsik gyé kyi
Through the eight expressions of wonder, you naturally liberated all you encountered,
zilnön tulshyuk né su kö dzé khyé
And brought all to the level of the yogic conduct of surpassing splendor.

sé ché gyalwé sang sum yönten dzö
The treasures, the qualities of the three secrets of the buddhas and bodhisattvas,
malü chik dom yishyin wang gi gyal
Were all found in you, powerful, wish-fulfilling monarch.
sishyi gelek tadak jowé chi
You bestowed every excellence in saṃsāra and nirvāṇa and
drenpé dung sel palden lama khyé
To recall you, my glorious guru, quells the anguish I feel.

gang dul trinlé nam shyi roltsé kyi
The play of your fourfold taming activity elevated the teachings of Buddha
ten dang dé dzin chegü upang gung
And those who uphold them to greater heights.
rab tö trinlé nangwé sa sum khyön
Highly praised, your activity reached throughout the three realms.
khyabpé getsen barwa khyé kyi drin
Such a pervasive glow of auspiciousness and virtue is all your kindness.

drin la khorta minduk palden gyi lama
Glorious guru whose kindness could never be repaid,
dé dang dungwa drakpö khyé chik rang bö na
I call out to you with a fierce and longing faith –
rangsem khyé tuk long dang yermé du gyur né
Cause my mind to merge and become one with the expanse of your wisdom.
trul tok rangsar drolwé ngödrub dé tsol dzö
And bestow, I pray, the accomplishment whereby mistaken thoughts are freed in and of themselves.

This Calling the Guru from Afar prayer is directed toward the crown jewel of all the oceanic
non-sectarian teachings of Buddha in the Land of Snows, our incomparable Lord of Refuge,
the excellent and glorious emanated great treasure-revealer, Gyurme Tekchok Tenpe Gyaltsen.
It has been thirty years since, before the eyes of his disciples, he showed the aspect of
departing into the dhātu of peace. Therefore, at this special time, I thought to combine
a great accomplishment ceremony, based on his profound treasure, the Rangjung Pema Nyingtik
(The Heart-Essence of the Spontaneously Arisen Padma), with elaborate and grand offerings
to mark the anniversary of his mahāparinirvāṇa. To this end, I was repeatedly blessed with
continuous dreams of my master and received the blessing to be continually cared for by
him. Written by the one who holds the name of Rabjam Tulku on the fifteenth day of the eighth
month in the year of the Iron Ox (20 September, 2021).

| Translated by Sean Price. © Shechen Translations, 2021. Published here with the kind permission
of Rabjam Rinpoche.

Version: 1.0-20210924