Calling the Guru From Afar
by Kyabje Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche

a ho
Aho!
sishyi khyabdak rangjung dangpo yi sangye
Primordial Buddha, self-arisen and pervading both saṃsāra and nirvāṇa,
ösal ku dang yönten mizepé jungné
You are the inexhaustible source of both the kāyas and qualities of luminosity;
chöying khyabdal yeshe kuchen gyi tönpa
Teacher possessed of the wisdom kāya that pervades the dharmadhātu—
chökü lama dorjé tuk chok tsal khyen no
Dharmakāya guru, Dorje Tukchok Tsal, care for me!

rabjam kyilkhor gyatsö namrol gyi köpa
Magically you emanate and reabsorb
samyé tro dang duwé chotrul gyi jepo
An infinite display of maṇḍala forms that defy the imagination,
detong pogyur mepé tiklé ru sharwa
Arising as the bindu of unchanging bliss and emptiness—
longkü lama pema wangchen tsal khyen no
Saṃbhogakāya guru, Pema Wangchen Tsal, care for me!

malü sé dang chepé gyal kün gyi trinlé
The activity of all the victorious buddhas and their offspring blossomed
jamgön palden lamé tsenpé ru shyepé
As the major and minor signs of this glorious master, Gentle Protector,
rimé tendrö getsen döpa ru jo dzé
Whose unbiased benefit of the teaching and beings fulfils all wishes—
tulkü lama khyentsé özer dé khyen no
Nirmāṇakāya guru, Khyentse Özer, care for me!

kadrin tsungda dralwé drinchen gyi lama
Guru of supreme kindness, your tenderness is beyond compare.
dralmé chitsuk gyen du takpa ru shyuk né
May I never be separated from you: forever adorn my crown!
gonggyü jinlab zabmö nyinjé kyi nangwa
May the blessings of your profound illuminating wisdom
nyurdu nying la pob chik yeshe kyi wangkur
Transfer swiftly to my heart: pray bestow wisdom’s empowerment!

dé dang nyingjé ngejung changsem kyi gyü dul
May my mind be tamed by faith, compassion, renunciation and bodhicitta;
kyé dang dzokpa tarsön wang shyi yi lam gyi
May I master generation and perfection phases, complete the path of the four empowerments,
tartuk döma chökü gyaltab la göpé
And win the royal domain of the primordial dharmakāya—
tuk yi chik tu drepar jin gyi rang lob shik
Bless me that my mind may merge with your omniscience!

In response to a request made by an earnest practitioner, Neudong Bentsang Lama, Maṅgala Śrībhūti,
who is a mere reflection of a lama, penned this. May it prove meritorious and meaningful.
Maṅgalaṃ!

| Translated by Sean Price, 2021. © Shechen. Reproduced with permission.

Source: bkra shis dpal 'byor. "bsgrub brtson sne'u gdong ban tshang bla mas bskul ngor mdzad
pa/ a ho/ srid zhi'i khyab bdag sogs/" in gsung 'bum/_rab gsal zla ba. TBRC W21809. 25 vols.
Delhi: Shechen Publications, 1994. Vol. 2: 247b–248a.

Version: 1.0-20210916