Concise Offering of the Body
From the Root Text of the Heart Accomplishment of the Guru Tukdrup, The Essential Manual of
Oral Instructions (Shaldam Nyingjang)
by Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche

Begin with refuge and bodhicitta
namo
Namo.
dak sok dro kün changchub bar
I, along with all other beings,
tsawa sum la kyab su chi
Take refuge in the three roots.
shyendön sangye tob jé chir
I will train in offering the body
lü kyi chöjin gompar gyi
So as to awaken for the benefit of all.

Actual Offering of the Body
p’et, rangsem machö tröma nak
Phaṭ! My uncontrived mind appears as the wrathful black ḍākinī.
tsangpé lam né gyang kyi tön
She leaves my body, shooting through the pathway of the brahma-aperture and far into the sky.
ösal ying kyi namkha la
Within the sky-like expanse of luminosity
rigpa rangnang chakgyar shar
Awareness naturally appears as the mudrā.
chak yé dorjé driguk gi
With the vajra-cleaver in her right hand
rang lü pungpo dumbur tub
She chops my body into pieces
tongsum dang nyam töpé nang
And heaps them into a skull-cup the size of the billionfold universe,
yeshe dütsi gyatsor kyil
Where they gather and transform into an oceanic nectar of wisdom;
langpa döyön ngaden pé
The steam of which transforms into cloud-banks filled with offerings
chötrin kha dang nyampar pel
To delight the five senses, increasing to fill the entire sky;
zakmé dewa chenpö dzé
These substances of uncontaminated bliss
peldrib dralwé gyen du gyur
Become an ornament beyond expansion and reduction.
om ah hung
Oṃ āḥ hūṃ.
p’et, nangsi nöchü tamché kün
Phaṭ! Absolutely everything—the environment and those whose who inhabit it—
döné namdrol chakgya ché
Has only ever been sealed as complete liberation.
ösal gyumé rolpa lé
From within this magical play of luminosity
sishyi chiryang nangwé drön
Appear both saṃsāra and nirvāṇa, filled with guests
choktsam tengok küntu khyab
Who pervade every direction all around, above and below.
dro ong mepé gongpar dal
The realization which lies beyond coming and going
tamché ronyam chenpö ngang
Unfolds in vast measure, and all is realized to be of a single taste.
könchok tsa sum gyatso chö
Within that realization I offer to the oceanic three precious ones and three roots;
chökyong sungmé tukdam kang
I offer to appease the dharma guardians and purify broken samaya;
gek rik lenchak tsim chir jin
I offer to clear my karmic debts and appease the troublemakers to whom I’m indebted;
rik druk nyingjé tsok la ngo
And finally out of compassion, I offer this nectar to all other sentient beings.
zakmé dütsi chöjin gyi
Through this offering of uncontaminated nectar,
gyé shing nyé né rab tsim té
May the four guests be pleased and satisfied;
sönam tsokchen lhün gyi drub
And the accumulation of merit spontaneously perfected;
yeshe ösal tsolmé shar
May the wisdom of natural luminosity effortlessly arise;
khor sum tsenma lé depé
And may all render evident the primordial, natural state,
dömé neluk ngöngyur shok
Which lies beyond the concepts of the three times.
p’et
Phaṭ!
Recite this and rest in unobservable, non-conceptual emptiness.

Through the power of my immeasurable offering,May the buddha nature be swiftly rendered evidentFor
the betterment of all and, for those who were not liberated by the buddhas of the past,May
they be liberated by my generosity.

The preliminary and concluding verses were composed by Maṅgala (Kyabje Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche).

| Translated by Sean Price, 2020.