Concise Daily Practice of Vajrasattva
arranged by Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche

Refuge & Bodhicitta
First, take refuge and generate bodhicitta as follows:
namo, rik kün khyabdak lama jé
Namo! Precious Guru, the lord of all families,
ngödrub jungné yidam lha
Divine Yidam, the source of all siddhis,
barché kün sel khandroma
Ḍākinī, the dispeller of all obstacles—
tsawa sum la kyab su chi
In the Three Roots, I take refuge!
Repeat this verse three times.
ho, magyur semchen tamché kün
Ho! In order for all mother sentient beings
sangye gopang tob jé chir
To obtain the state of a fully enlightened buddha,
nyechö kün dom gé tsok dü
I promise to abandon all misdeeds, accumulate merit,
shyenpen changsem taktu kyé
And always cultivate bodhicitta for others' sake.
Main Part
Repeat three times. Then, practise the yoga of the main part:
a, dorjé sempa namkha ché
Ā! Vajrasattva, great space,
zungwé mi zin chuda dra
Unobtainable through grasping, like the moon in water.
kuntuzangpö rolpa lé
As the emanation of Samantabhadra,
tabshé zungjuk tsawé lha
You are the main deity, the union of wisdom and method,
sempa karpo dordril nam
A heroic being, white in color, and holding vajra and bell,
rang ö yum khyü detong jor
Embracing the consort of innate luminosity, the union of bliss and emptiness,
dar dang rinchen gyen gyi gyen
And adorned with silk and jewel ornaments.
machö lhukpé ngang nyi lé
From the state of the unfabricated nature,
tsowö tukkar shyiwa dang
The peaceful deities appear at the main deity's heart
chiwor traktung lhatsok sal
And wrathful deities appear vividly at his crown.
tukkar nyidé ga'u ü
At his heart, upon discs of sun and moon
hung la ngak kyi trengwé kor
Is the syllable Hūṃ surrounded by a garland of mantra,
özer trodü dön nyi jé
From which light rays radiate, then return, performing two kinds of benefit
nyamchak tok drib ying su jang
And pacifying transgressions and obscurations of awareness into space.
nöchü shyitro rabjam kyi
The entire outer and inner world arises as deity, mantra and wisdom
lha ngak yeshe rolpar shar
Of the countless peaceful and wrathful deities.
Mantra Recitation
om benza sato a
oṃ vajrasatva āḥ
Recite the mantra of Vajrasattva. After that:
om bodhitsitta maha sukha jnana dhatu a
oṃ bodhicitta mahāsukha jñānadhātu āḥ
The general mantra of peaceful deities, and then:
om rulu rulu hung jo hung
oṃ rulu rulu hūṃ bhyo hūm
The general mantra of wrathful deities. To conclude:
With 'Hūṃ! Hūṃ! Hūṃ!', everything dissolves into clear light.
With 'Phaṭ! Phaṭ! Phaṭ!', you re-emerge as the deity between sessions.
Dedication
gewa di yi nyurdu dak
Through this merit, may I swiftly accomplish
dorjé sempa drub gyur né
The state of Vajrasattva,
drowa chik kyang malüpa
And may I establish every sentient being without exception
dé yi sa la göpar shok
In that perfect state as well.
Seal with the dedication and prayers of aspiration.
Maṅgala adapted this from Thukdrub Zheldam Nyingjang (Heart Practice Manual of Oral Instructions).
Virtue!

| Translated by Abraham Ta-Quan, 2019.