Guru Yoga: The Complete Path of Sūtra And Tantra
by Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche

I. Four Common Outer Preliminaries
kyema kyi hü lama rinpoche
O alas! Precious Guru!
nyé ka dön chen daljor tob dü dir
Now that I have gained the freedoms and advantages, so meaningful and difficult to obtain,
mi tak chiwa drenpé gyü kul té
I shall spur myself on through recollection of death and impermanence,
gedik gyundré yiché langdor gyi
Trust in cause and effect, adopt virtue and abandon harmful deeds.

II. Uncommon Inner Preliminaries
1. Taking Refuge and Generating Bodhicitta
jikrung khorwé gyatso lé gal chir
In order to cross the terrifying ocean of saṃsāra,
kyab sum kündü lamar depé ten
I shall respectfully rely on Guru, who embodies the Three Jewels,
khakhyab pama sishyi lé drol chir
And set my mind upon supreme, unsurpassed enlightenment
lamé changchub chok tu semkyé do
So that I may free my fathers and mothers, who are as limitless as space, from both existence
and quiescence.

3. Visualizing the Support for Accumulations in Guru Yoga
rang lü tar sal chiwor rik gyé dak
I am in my ordinary form; above my head is the Lord of a hundred families,
tsa sum kündü tsokyé dorjé chang
Embodiment of the Three Roots, Lake-Born Vajradhara (Tsokye Dorjechang),
yermé kabab dünden khyentsé wang
Indivisible from the master of the seven transmissions, Jamyang Khyentsé Wangpo—
tek chok tenpa yongdzok shingté gar
Dance-like emanation and chariot for the entire teachings of the supreme vehicle.
dorjé dzin ché dordril pedong teng
He has the attire of Vajradhara and holds a vajra and bell and two lotus stalks.
jikdral mipam chok tsön yé raldri
Upon the right lotus is a sword, symbolizing fearlessness and supreme invincibility,
chökyi lodrö lekbam yön du shyuk
And upon the left is a volume of text to represent understanding of the Dharma.
rik gyé khyabdak gyaltsab gurü tsul
He is the sovereign of a hundred families, a regent in guru's form,
rabjam tsa sum gyalwé kor té shyuk
And surrounded by infinite deities of the Three Roots and Victorious Ones.

4. Seven Branches, The Essence of Accumulation and Purification
chok chu dü shyi kyabné gyatso la
To all sources of refuge throughout the whole of space and time,
güpé chaktsal chö ching diktung shak
I respectfully pay homage and make offerings; I confess my harmful actions and transgressions,
gé la yi rang chökhor kor shyindu
Rejoice in virtuous actions, pray that the Wheel of Dharma be turned,
kal gyar shyuk sol gé tsok dro la ngo
Request you to remain for a hundred aeons, and dedicate all the virtues I have accumulated to
sentient beings.

5. Meditation and Recitation of Vajrasattva
lamé tukkar dorsem yabyum lé
At the Guru's heart is Vajrasattva with consort,
dütsi gyün bab diktung kün jang gyur
From whom there flows a stream of nectar that purifies all negative karma and transgressions.
Accumulate the Hundred-Syllable Mantra.

6. Offering the Maṇḍala (Optional)
om ah hung, ku sum shyingkham longchö dang
Oṃ āḥ hūṃ! Enjoyments in the pure lands of the Three Kāyas,
chi nang sangwé chöpé trin
I offer to the Three Jewels and Three Roots
könchok tsawa sum la bul
As outer, inner and secret offering clouds.
shyé né choktün ngödrub tsol
Accept it, and grant supreme and ordinary accomplishments, I pray!
om ah hung guru dewa dakini sapariwara ratna mandal pudza megha ah hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ guru deva ḍākinī saparivāre ratna maṇḍala pūjā megha āḥ hūṃ

7. Supplication
gyurmé dendön ngön zik tsokyé jé
May the victory banner of the teachings of the Great Perfection—
ringluk drimé tek chok dzogpa ché
True perception, the unchanging ultimate truth,
tenpé gyaltsen si tar dreng shyindu
The tradition of Lord Padma, the supreme vehicle, stay aloft until the end of existence,
kal gyar shyabten trinlé gyé gyur chik
Remain for a hundred aeons and the enlightened activities spread!
Pray like that and consider that the Guru dissolves into you.

8. Practice of the Vase Empowerment
rang lü kechik jetsün jampé yang
In an instant, I appear in the form of noble Mañjughoṣa,
raldri puti dzinpa longkü ché
Holding a sword and volume of text and with saṃbhogakāya ornaments,
marser charkhé nyima tabur gyur
Orange in colour just like the sun at dawn.
tukkar pema la né sok ngak dhih
At my heart, upon a lotus, is the vital syllable Dhīḥ.
yikdru druk la sem té trodu yi
As I focus my attention on the six syllables, they emanate and reabsorb [rays of light],
mi shé mün sal yeshe nangwa gyé
Dispelling the darkness of ignorance and causing wisdom’s radiance to expand.

9. Practice of the Secret Empowerment
nöchü jampal shying sal lha ngak sé
The outer and inner world transforms into the pure land of Mañjuśrī and becomes one with deity
and mantra.
om a ra pa tsa na dhih
oṃ arapacana dhīḥ

10. Practice of the Wisdom Empowerment
rang gi tewar yeshe tummo yi
The wisdom fire at my own navel
chiwö hang shyü ga shyi nyam kyé sam
Melts the syllable Haṃ at my crown, bringing an experiences of the four joys.
Hold the breath and apply the key points of vase breathing practice.

11. Practice of the Fourth Empowerment
The above is the outer guru yoga of relative truth. What follows is the inner guru yoga of ultimate
truth:
nam ché lha ngak chönyi long du tim
All aspects of the practice, deity and mantra dissolve into the space of Dharmatā,
nammé nyukma chöku jampal yang
The formless and genuine dharmakāya of Mañjuśrī—
döné dudral mepar shyukpa yi
Indivisible from my own true nature throughout beginningless time,
rang ngo nyamjé ri su ma ché ta
Where there is no division between meditation and post-meditation.

12. Dedication, Aspiration and Auspicious Words
namkar gewé lama mandzu shri
By the virtue of performing this practice,
yeshe ku dang nyimé tsul changwé
May I become inseparable from the wisdom body of Mañjuśrī.
sé ché gyalwé namtar jé lob té
Then, by following the footsteps of the Victorious Ones and their heirs,
ku ngé khyabdak ché drub tashi shok
May all be auspicious so that we attain great sovereignty over the five kāyas!

Thus, when my friend Shedrub Chökyi Senge, who is as dear as my own heart, made the request
t I, Tashi Paljor, composed this innermost essence of the pith instructions. Through this
virtue, may we put these few verses (in which all the essential points of true meaning are
contained) into practice, and through this, realize the four kāyas and wisdom of the great
Guru. And may the virtuous signs of being able to benefit the teachings and beings on a
large scale blaze forth. Sarva maṅgalaṃ. Virtue!

| Translated by Abraham Ta-Quan, 2019.

Version: 1.2-20220112