Lamenting Prayer to Jamyang Chökyi Lodrö
by Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche

gyal kün tuk ü jamyang yeshe sem
Wisdom being Mañjughoṣa, core of all the victorious ones’ enlightened minds,
rimé chökyi shingta chenpö tsul
In the guise of a great pioneer of the non-sectarian Dharma,
khyentsé lodrö tutob pata yé
Boundless in your strength and wise, loving intelligence,
dadral palden lamar solwa deb
Glorious and incomparable guru, to you I pray.

nyikdü mak gi gyalten nangwa drib
The dark of this degenerate age obscures the light of Buddha’s teachings,
chökyi shenyen yangdak lam töndral
And we lack authentic dharma friends who could show us the way.
né muk tsön gyi yichen kün narwa
When all living beings are plagued by disease, famine and warfare,
tukjé yalwar dor di chi la gong
How, in your compassion, could you consider ignoring our plight?

dzutrul kang shyi kyé ga na chi yi
Through the four bases of miraculous powers, you traversed the river
chuwo lé gal wang dang tob chü tü
Of birth, old age, sickness and death, and through the force of the ten strengths,
shyingkham rabjam trulpé khyab tönpé
You manifest emanations who pervade infinite realms—
getsen kyareng lar yang trowar dzö
Once more, may you usher in such a dawn of auspicious signs!

tukkyé ö gyé nyikmé makrum sel
Let the hundred lights of your exalted aspiration dispel the darkness of this degenerate age,
namtar tob kyi tubten yongdzok dzin
As through your strength of liberation, you uphold the Sage’s teaching in its entirety.
nyik dro dul la tubwang pejung gi
To fulfil the aspirations of the Lord of Sages and the Lotus-Born
mönlam ngöngyur trulpé kur shyeng sol
For disciplining beings of decadent times, arise, I pray, in nirmāṇakāya form!

deyang sang sum barché yul lé gyal
Let your three secrets be victorious in the battle with obstructing forces,
trinlé gyatsö lhakma jishyin kyong
So that you may carry out the remainder of your ocean-like activity
dak sok dulja jesu nyur zungwé
And swiftly guide and care for disciples like me—
den dré ngönsum tsol chik lama jé
Precious guru, bring this about with immediate effect!

chok dü sé ché gyalwé den jin dang
Through the truth and blessings of the victors and their heirs throughout space and time,
lobpa lam gyi dorjé tatsik gi
And through the vajra oaths of those on the path of training,
jitar mönpé dön kün lhündrubpé
Let all the splendour of virtue and auspiciousness unfold,
tashi getsen pal kün gyé gyur chik
So that all these points of aspiration are spontaneously fulfilled!

Based on the condition of a request, supported by gifts, from several devoted disciples, including
Ngari Chöje Tulku from the precious guru’s own seat, Lama Sherab Gyatso and others,
combined with my own fervent anguish, I, the one called Jigme Khyentse Özer Tashi Paljor
of Dokham, who was the lowliest of the Jamgön Lama’s disciples, wrote this in the presence
of the precious kudung. May it be fulfilled just as we wish.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2021.

Source: bkra shis dpal 'byor. "'jam mgon chos kyi blo gros la gdung shugs smre sngags kyis gsol
ba 'debs pa/" gsung 'bum/_rab gsal zla ba. W21809. 25 vols. Delhi: Shechen Publications,
1994. Vol. 3: 71a–72a

Version: 1.0-20210924