Light of Compassion
A Prayer to the Wisdom Ḍākinīs
by Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche

chöying dorjé tsünmö yeshe ying
Within the wisdom-space of the Vajra Queen, the dharmadhātu,
detong gyutrul drawé trin treng lé
From garlands of clouds of the bliss-empty magical net,
jinlab ngödrub trinlé lok gar gyi
Your lightning dance of blessings, siddhis, and activities
pendé charbeb khandror solwa deb
Showers us with goodness and happiness—to you ḍākinīs I pray!

tubpé chen ngar gang gé lhamö tsul
As Gaṅgādevī in the presence of the Sage,1
gyal kün sung gi dorjé yangchenma
And Sarasvatī, vajra speech of all buddhas,
gurü gyé dé sang ngak ka dümo
Delighting your Guru, you compiled the Secret Mantra’s teachings.
yeshe tsogyal shyab la solwa deb
Lady Yeshé Tsogyal, to you I pray!

sangye kün gyi trinlé nyurmé tsul
Swift One—activity of all the buddhas—
dul ké dro kün drolwa pamö tsen
Renowned heroine—liberator of the hard-to-tame—2
sishyi dung kyob gyalwa kün yum ma
Mother of all Victors, Umbrella3 over existence and peace,
jetsün pakma drolmar solwa deb
Noble Lady Tārā, to you I pray!

namtar sum dzok ying yum kunzang mo
You are Samantabhadrī, mother of space, perfection of the three doors of liberation,
yeshe long nga rik kyi yumchen nga
The five great mothers of the five wisdom expanses and five families,
né sum khandrö jemo tröma nak
And Krodhikālī, empress of the ḍākinīs of the three abodes,
yingchuk dorjé pakmor solwa deb
Dhātviśvarī Vajravārāhī, to you I pray!

chok tu mingyur dechen dorjé zuk
Your vajra-form of great bliss, utterly unchanging,
gar gyi wangchuk gyé mé yum gyi tsul
Takes the guise of Nateśvara’s consort, lady of pleasure,
orgyen daki tsomor ngödrub dak
Queen of Siddhis, chief amongst Uḍḍiyāna’s ḍākinīs,
sangwa yeshe shyab la solwa deb
Lady Guhyajñānā, to you I pray!

ngö chikdumé rolpé dhakima
Ḍākinī—single essence with myriad displays,
döndam lhenchik kyé mé yeshe ying
Ultimate, co-emergent wisdom-space,
khordé künkhyab nyam yang dalwa ché
Vast, pervasive equality permeating all of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa—
ngowor dudral mepé solwa deb
Never parting from this essence, to you I pray!

ngejung kyoshé lam gyi gyü jang né
By purifying our minds through the path of renunciation and weariness,
dé mö tsönpé changchub chöpa dzok
Through faith, devotion and diligence, may we perfect the awakened conduct.
khyepar mindrol zabmö seng lam gyi
Especially, through the profound, direct path of ripening and liberation,
zungjuk dechen dorjé drong tsen shok
May we enjoy the vajra citadel of unified great bliss!

chöpa sum gyi nyé gyu tarsönpé
Perfecting the three conducts, the immediate cause,4
barwa sum gyi lungsem umar ching
May I bind the three blazes of the prāṇa-mind in the central channel,5
duwa sum gyi dön nyi lhündrub né
And through three gatherings may the two benefits be spontaneously accomplished.6
né sum khandrö tsok dang kal nyam shok
Thus may I gain the same fortune as the ḍākinīs of the three places.

tsewé küntu yeshe khandromé
In all my future lives, O wisdom ḍākinīs,
jesu zung té dorjé tek chok gyi
Take me under your care! Through the supreme Vajrayāna,
sangdzö dögur chöpa lhenkyé kyi
The innate, secret treasury that yields all to be desired,
yeshe tikler nyimé changchub shok
May I awaken, merging indivisibly with the wisdom bindu!

Dechen,7 the secret consort of Uḍḍiyāna Choktrül Rinpoche, who is splendorous with the ambrosial
light of wisdom and realization, made the request, and therefore, I, the lazy Khyentsé
Özer Pema Wangchen Gyepa Tsal, wrote this in the mountain hermitage of Tekchok Chöphel Ling
on the occasion of the chanting of the ripening empowerments and liberating instructions
of the earlier and later Nyingtik (Heart Essence) teachings. May it be a cause for the
completion of the swift vajra path, the great secret, leading to the attainment of mastery
over the secret treasury of siddhis and all that is desirable.

| Lhasey Lotsawa Translations, 2019. (Translated by Peter Woods, Stefan Mang and Oriane Sherap
Lhamo.)
↑ During the time of Buddha Śākyamuni, Yeshé Tsogyal took birth as Gaṅgādevī, who made a compilation
of the Buddha’s teachings.↑ The Tibetan text explicitly shows that “Swift One” (Turā,
myur ma) and “Heroine” (Vīrā, dpa’ mo) are epithets of Tārā.↑ A references to Sitātapatrā
(gdugs dkar mo).↑ This is a reference to the path of Anuyoga. The three conducts (spyod
pa gsum) are blessing (bying gyis rlob), overpowering (dbang bsgyur) and skillful means
(thabs).↑ The three blazes (’bar ba gsum) are blissful warmth in the body (lus la bde drod),
potency in speech (ngag la nus pa) and the realization in the mind (sems la rtogs pa).↑
The three gatherings (‘du ba gsum) are people during the day (nyin mor mi), ḍākinīs at night
(mtshan mor mka’ ‘gro) and material resources at all times (rtag tu zas nor).↑ i.e.,
Sangyum Kunzang Dechen, the consort of Tulku Urgyen Rinpoche.