Nectar Shower of Blessings
A Song of Yearning Devotion Recalling the Everpresent Gurus
by Kyabjé Dilgo Khyentsé Rinpoche

a ho
Aho!
chok dü gyalwé ku dang yeshe kyi khyabdak
Universal embodiment of the kāyas and wisdoms of all the buddhas throughout the whole of space
and time,
ngotsar namtar sam mi khyabpa yi jungné
And source of wondrous lives of liberation beyond imagining,
yab chik jampal palgön lamé kurshyengpa
Is the one and only father of all the buddhas, Mañjuśrī, who manifested in the form of this
glorious lama,
khedrub damé khyentsé wangpo dé khyen no
Whose learning and accomplishment are beyond compare—Khyentsé Wangpo, care for me! Guide me!
Inspire me! Make me one with you!

jé dé yeshe pejung bimala ngö nang
This great lord's wisdom embodiment was an actual manifestation of Padmasambhava and Vimalamitra,
yongdzok gyalten wanggyur jampal gyi shenyen
And of Mañjuśrīmitra, who mastered all the Buddha’s teachings in their entirety;
nyikmé münsel trinlé dzamling künkhyab dal
His enlightened actions to dispel the darkness of this degenerate age extending throughout the
whole of Jambudvīpa—
jampal yang ngö chökyi lodrö dé khyen no
Mañjughoṣa in person, Chökyi Lodrö, care for me! Guide me! Inspire me! Make me one with you!

daki tsomo tsogyal shelkar za yermé
Inseparable from the queen of ḍākinīs, Yeshé Tsogyal of Shelkar,
dorjé tsé chok pelwé chakgya ru shyengpé
Was the spiritual consort who extended the supreme vajra life of
pema yeshe dorjé gyé dé tsul dzepa
Pema Yeshé Dorjé,1 this great master, and cared for and delighted him—
ma chik tsering chö kyi drönma dé khyen no
One and only mother, Tsering Chödrön, care for me! Guide me! Inspire me! Make me one with you!

rangjung sangye pema vidzayé jezung
Guided by the spontaneously awakened Padma Vijaya,2
zabgyé kater gyülung mengak gi dzö chang
Keeper of the treasuries of the profound and vast kama and terma, tantras, commentaries and
pith instructions,
kyé kün jam gön gyepé ka bang su mönpa
You who aspire to serve Mañjughoṣa throughout all your lives—
gyurmé tek chok tenpé gyaltsen dé khyen no
Gyurmé Tekchok Tenpé Gyaltsen,3 care for me! Guide me! Inspire me! Make me one with you!

khyen no lama khyen no dak gyü la zik shik
Care for me! O masters, guide me! Look into my mind!
dü ngen nyikmé semchen lé ngen la gompé
We, the beings of this degenerate age, are so accustomed to our negative actions,
tarpé gokab dralwé mülong shyin gyurpé
That, as if blind, we have no chance of gaining liberation,
resa shyen la mepé dungshuk kyi bö do
And, with no other hope but you, we call out with fervent longing!

tokmé gompé trulnang chak gong lé sawa
Our deluded perception, cultivated throughout beginningless time, is tougher than iron,
yang trul nyikmé chöpé ya drek kyi tumpa
And we are further deluded by our own impure actions, which are like a layer of rust—
chaktok dralwé jin gyi men chen du gyur né
Through your unimpeded inspiration and blessings, transform this delusion into a great healing
medicine,
lona chö la gyurwé khalo pa dzö chik
And be our guides, steering our minds towards the Dharma!

tarnang ngen chö sashyi dultren lé mang kyang
It appears as if negative actions are more numerous than atoms in this world,
chö shyin chöpé samjor ser zang lé könpé
While Dharmic thoughts and actions are rarer even than finest gold—
trulnang tokpé drawa tsentab su chö la
So cut through the tight mesh of our deluded thoughts and perceptions,
chö zang tek chok lam la chö nü shyik dzö chik
And enable us to practise the excellent Dharma on the path of the supreme vehicle!

sak jang jé tsé tsé di lekpé gyur mik shing
Whenever we view the practices of accumulation and purification as causes for happiness in this
life alone,
ta lokta ngen jé lob chö gyé kyi ching tak
Or hold false, mistaken views, cut through such bonds of the eight worldly concerns,
ché né gyalwa gyepé lam chok la jorwé
And, by leading us to the supreme path which delights all the buddhas,
changchub chöpa gyatso chö nü su dzö chik
Empower us to carry out vast oceans of enlightened action!

nang chö yeshe chenpö khorlo ru shar né
When our perception and experience dawns as the maṇḍala of great primordial awareness,
rangrik yeshe lamé jinlab kyi nyimé
Then, through the sun-like blessings of the lama, who is the wisdom of our very own rigpa,
trulpa shyi la dakpé tsensa shyik zin né
Let us seize the stronghold, in which delusion is purified into its basic nature,
ku sum lama jalwé kalzang la jor dzö
And grant us the excellent fortune of meeting the three-kāya guru!

This was written by the old white-haired Maṅgala, from his bed, near a flowering garden in north-east
France, to fulfil the wishes of the son of the Lakar family of great Dharma benefactors,
Tulku Sonam Gyaltsen (Sogyal Rinpoche), who requested a prayer of ‘calling the guru
from afar’ to accompany a practice of guru yoga. May it be of benefit!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2012. Revised 2016.

Source: bkra shis dpal 'byor. "khyab bdag bla ma rjes su dran pa'i gdung dbyangs byin rlabs
bdud rtsi'i char 'bebs sogs tshan pa gnyis/" in gsung 'bum/_rab gsal zla ba. TBRC W21809.
25 vols. Delhi: Shechen Publications, 1994. Vol. 3: 268a–269a.

Version: 2.1-20210916
↑ Jamyang Khyentsé Chökyi Lodrö↑ A reference to Shechen Gyaltsab Gyurme Pema Namgyal (1871–1926),
Dilgo Khyentsé Rinpoche’s root teacher.↑ Dilgo Khyentsé Rinpoche.