Shower of Indestructible Splendour
A Self-Initiation for the Guru Practice of the Vidyādhara Assembly, from the Heart-Essence of
the Vast Expanse
by Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche

Here are presented the stages for entering into
The space of the four vajras—
The three secrets of the vidyādhara guru,
The omnipresent lord of the infinite maṇḍalas of the three roots.
For those who wish to practice the self-initiation of The Vidyādhara Assembly, the guru's heart
practice, the root of all blessings and accomplishments and the omnipresent lord of the
infinite deities of the three roots, should do as follows.
Using a maṇḍala of coloured sand or painted cloth, carry out the ritual of the lines and colours
followed by the consecration, as is laid out in The General Meaning of Empowerment.1
The peaceful maṇḍala has four archways and within its centre an eight-petalled lotus. Its
centre is marked by the deity or the implement of the brilliant white seed-syllable hūṃ.
On the eight petals are essence-drops whose colours are white, yellow, red and green in the
cardinal directions and blue in the ordinal directions. The four doors are marked by an essence-drop
which has the same colour as its corresponding cardinal direction. If you are unable
to do this, then it is also acceptable to create heaps of grains equal to the number
of deities and sprinkle them with fragrant water.
In any case, arrange a tripod in the centre. Upon it place a vase with a white ribbon tied to
its neck. Decorate the vase around its neck and attach a dhāraṇī-cord and a vajra. Fill
two thirds of the vase with fragrant water to which the thirty-five substances have been added.
On the right, place a mirror to which essence-drops of sindūra are applied and on top of which
is a crystal. On the left, arrange the secret substances. In the West, place the empowerment
card of the consort. In the front or in the back, wherever is convenient, place the
amṛta medicine, the bali and the rakta. Put the regular offerings around the maṇḍala and gather
and arrange the bali offerings for the Dharma protectors, the covenant, the Immovable
Goddesses,2 the white bali and the obstructive-forces bali, and set the activity vase and
the feast offerings in the usual way.
Now begin the actual ritual.
I. Establishing the Maṇḍala
Carry out the practice from the lineage prayers up to and including the praise of the main text.
Then visualize the following:
droom bisho bishuddhé om ah hung benza guru pema siddhi hung pé dza
bhrūṃ viśva viśuddhe oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra-guru padma siddhi hūṃ phaṭ jaḥ
dak gi tukka né yeshepa loksu ché té dünkyé kyi tsul du shyukpar gyur
The wisdom deity in my heart separates and appears as the front visualization.
Then, following the Manual of Concealed Instructions,3 carry out the recitations of the approach
and accomplishment, including the 'song of hūṃ'.
bumpé nang du lama rigdzin düpé lhatsok khor dang chepa gyatso la zakar trawa tar tuk sok ngak
treng dang chepa salwa la
Visualize within the vase the hosts of deities of the guru practice of the Vidyādhara Assembly
together with their retinue, like stars and constellations reflected on a lake. Within
their hearts is the life-force syllable surrounded by the mantra garland.
daknyi lhar salwé tukké ngak treng zung tak la gyü dé songwé bum lhé tukgyü kul
Visualize yourself as the deity. From the mantra garland at your heart [light streams out],
flowing through the dhāraṇī cord and invoking the wisdom minds of the deities in the vase.
özer trodü dön nyi jé shing ku lé zakmé dechen dütsi gyün chen babpé bumpa yongsu gangwar gyur
Light rays radiate out and gather back, accomplishing the twofold benefit. A stream of amṛta
of immaculate great bliss flows out from the deities' form and fills the vase completely.
Contemplate on this and recite as many approach and accomplishment mantras as you can.
lé bum du kechik gi trowo tamdrin marpo yé pemé yuk to dang
Visualize instantly the wrathful Hayagrīva inside the activity vase. He is red in colour, his
right hand holds a club with lotus flowers and his left hand holds aloft a lasso of fire.
yön mé shyakpa tokpar salwé ku lé dorjé dütsi dul tra rab babpé bumpa gangwar gyur
From his body descend tiny particles of vajra-amṛta that fill the vase completely.
om hayagriva hung pé
oṃ hayagrīva hūṃ phaṭ
Recite this. At the end of the session, recite the vowels and consonants, the mantra of the
essence of interdependent origination, the offerings and praise, and the hundred-syllable
mantra. Then present the offering with:
om ah hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ
The deities of the vase dissolve into light.
II. The Actual Self-Initiation
This has eight parts:
1. [The Cleansing]
jitar tampa tsam gyi ni
Just as the gods cleansed your body
lha nam kyi ni trü sol tar
Moments after you took birth,
lha yi chu ni dakpa yi
With the purest water of the gods,
deshyin dak gi kutrü sol
Likewise I now cleanse and empower you.
om sarwa tathagata abhishekaté samaya shriyé hung
oṃ sarva tathāgata abhiṣekate samaya śrīye hūṃ
Give the bali to the outsiders4. Or, concisely, expel the obstructive forces with the mantra
of the four hūṃs.
Meditate on the protection circle with:
benza jnana raksha droom
vajra-jñāna rakṣa bhrūṃ
Put on the blindfold with:
tsakshu bhenda
oṃ cakṣu bhandha vāra maṇāya hūṃ
Hold the flower with:
a kham wira
aḥ khaṃ vīra hūṃ5
Then offer a maṇḍala.
2. The Request
ho, dak ni kalden rik kyi bu
Hoḥ. Please take care of me, a fortunate child of Noble Family,
tukjé chenpö jezung lah
And look upon me with your great compassion.
damtsik chenpö kyilkhor du
Allow me to enter this maṇḍala of the great samaya
juk ching minpar dzé du sola
And bring me to maturity!
Make this request three times, then consider that your request has been granted.
ho, sangwa chok gi kyilkhor du
Hoḥ. This maṇḍala of the supreme secret
jukpar ka la khenyen che
Is difficult to enter and the stakes are high:
damtsik nyam na lak gyur sa
Impairing the samaya will bring destruction;
dam sung wangkur jinpar ja
So, maintain the samaya and I’ll grant you empowerment.
3. Gathering the Accumulations
dorjé lobpön sangye pal
I prostrate to the vajra master,
dü sum shyuk la chaktsal lo
Glorious embodiment of the buddhas of past, present and future!

chok sum tenpé shying gyur la
With a mind free from all duality,
nyimé yi kyi kyab su chi
I take refuge in the Three Jewels, the objects of reliance!

ngöjor yi kyi nam trulpé
I request that you accept these pure offerings,
dakpé chöpa shyé su sol
Both actual and envisioned.

ngödrub chuwo chöpé gek
My faults, the hindrances that cut the flow of siddhis,
nyejé malü shakpar gyi
I confess without exception.

chok chu khor sum dakpé chö
In all those actions throughout the ten directions, done without attachment,
machak chö la jé yirang
And free from concepts of subject, object and action, I rejoice!

dakpé tawé drimamé
I awaken the perfect bodhicitta,
dzokpé changchub semkyé do
Pure, untainted by the four extremes.

deshek wangchuk sempa la
To the sugatas, mighty lords and sentient beings
dakpa sum gyi lü bul lo
I offer my body for the threefold purpose.

tserab drangpé gewa nam
Gathering the merits accumulated throughout all my lives,
dü né changchub chok tu ngo
I dedicate them to supreme enlightenment!
4. Taking the Vows
dewar shekpa khyé chindra
Bliss-Gone One,6 whatever you are like,
dendra khonar dak gyur chik
May I become exactly the same,
chöpa mejung samyé pa
And carry out wondrous, inconceivable actions
dro la pen chir dak gi chö
In order to bring benefit to beings.
changchub sem chok dampa dang
The vows of the supreme mind set upon awakening
ku sung tuk kyi chakgya ni
And the mudrās of body, speech and mind,
sok gi chir yang mi tong na
Even at the cost of my own life, I shall not forsake.
dorjé gyalpö jinlab dzö
Vajra king, inspire me with your blessings.
Three times.
5. Entering the Maṇḍala
samaya prabéshaya pé
samaya praveśāya phaṭ
Consider that the four doors of the maṇḍala suddenly open. Circumambulate the maṇḍala with its
four doors, which symbolize the four immeasurables, in a clockwise direction and then enter.
Pay homage to the enlightened body, speech and mind with:
om nama té hung
oṃ nama te hūṃ
om nama mé hung
oṃ nama me hūṃ
om namo nama hung
oṃ namo nama hūṃ
Four times.
6. Taking Birth as Their Heir and Descent of Wisdom
kyilkhor gyi shar gor wang tek pema dab gyé la khöpa
Consider that you are placed at the eastern door of the maṇḍala on an empowerment platform on
a lotus with eight petals.
tsowö tukka né özer jung nammin gyi lü ten jang
From the heart of the principal deity light radiates, purifying your karmically ripened body.
nampar shepa hung yikkar por gyur
Your consciousness transforms into a white hūṃ syllable.
shyal né drang kü yib gyü lama yabyum gyi shyal du shyuk
It shoots out from your mouth into the mouths of the principal deity and his consort and moves
through their bodies.
jé chak kyi shyuwa jortsam su babpa detong lé kyepé sé kyi nampar gyurpa ngar gyi den la khö
Their passion causes it to melt and to descend to their point of union. You transform into the
form of their offspring, born from bliss and emptiness, and are placed back on the platform.
denyi rik künkhyab dak rigdzin lamé kur gyurpa ni
Then you transform into the form of the vidyādhara guru, the all-pervasive lord of all buddha
families.
natsok pema nyidé teng
In its centre, upon a multicoloured lotus, sun and moon, is a hūṃ,
hung lé kechik dren dzok su
Out of which, perfect in the very moment of envisioning,
daknyi sangye kün gyi ngö
I arise as the actual presence of all the buddhas—
nangsi zilnön pema jung
The Lotus-Born ‘Prevailing Over All That Appears and Exists’.

shyal chik chak nyi kar mar dang
He has one face and two hands, and is white tinged with red.
tek sum dzokpé datak su
As a sign of complete mastery over the three vehicles,
pökha chögö ber dung nab
He wears monastic robes, gown and cape.
chak yé dorjé tsé nga dik
His right hand wields a five-spoked vajra in the threatening mudrā,

yönpé bhenda tsebum nam
His left holds a skull-cup containing the long-life vase.
chenkhung yön na lhacham dzé
Cradled in his left arm is the beautiful goddess, Mandāravā.
u la pemé nyen shyusol
On his head he wears the lotus hat,
gyalpo rolpé tab kyi gying
And he is seated in the graceful posture of royal poise.

detar salwé né sum du yikdru sum gyi tsenpa lé özer tröpé chok chü deshyin shekpa sé dang chepa
chendrang té timpé go sum dorjé sum du gyurpar gyur
Like this, visualize everything clearly. Your three centres are marked with the three seed-syllables,
from which light rays burst forth, inviting the Thus-Gone Ones of the ten directions,
including their bodhisattva heirs. They dissolve into you, transforming your body, speech
and mind into the three vajras.
If you want to elaborate:
hung, ngön gyi kalpé dangpo la
Hūṃ! At the very beginning of this age,
orgyen yul gyi nubjang tsam
In the north-west of the land of Oḍḍiyāna,
pema gesar dongpo la
In the heart of a lotus flower,
yatsen chok gi ngödrub nyé
Endowed with the most marvellous attainments,
pema jungné shyé su drak
You are renowned as the ‘Lotus-born’,
khor du khandro mangpo dang
Surrounded by your retinue of many ḍākinīs
rigdzin drubtob gyatsö kor
And oceanic hosts of vidyādharas and siddhas.
khyé kyi jesu dak drub kyi
Following in your footsteps, I practise.
jin gyi lab chir shek su sol
Come! Inspire us with your blessings—
né chok diru jin pob la
Shower down your blessings on this supreme place!
drub chok dak la wang shyi kur
Grant us, supreme practitioners, the four empowerments!
gek dang lokdren barché sol
Remove any negativity, obstructing force or disturbance to our practice!
chok dang tünmong ngödrub tsol
Grant us attainments, ordinary and supreme!
om ah hung benza guru pema tötreng tsal benza samaya dza dza
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra-guru-padma tötrengtsal | vajra-samāja jaḥ jaḥ
Light incense and invoke the wisdom until your body quivers and trembles. Then stabilize it
with:
tishta benza
tiṣṭha vajra
Cast the flower of awareness with:
pratitsa benza ho
pratīccha vajra hoḥ
Place the flower on your head and imagine that the superior deity dissolves into you:
prati ghrihana imam sato maha bala
prati gṛhaṇa imam satva mahābala
Imagine that you see what the teacher shows you:7
tsakshu prabéshaya pé
cakṣu praveśaya phaṭ
yingrik ku sum gyi drönmé nangcha ku dang yeshe gyatsö jungné
The Illusory Net’s maṇḍala of the Vidyādhara gurus, both deities and palace—
lama rigdzin gyutrul drawé kyilkhor ten dang tenpar chepa ngönsum du jalwar gyur
The appearance aspect of the three-kāya lamp of awareness and emptiness and the source of infinite
kāyas and wisdom— actually manifests.
7. The Prayer
changchub dorjé sangye la
As the Vajra of Enlightenment bestowed
chö chen jitar tsalwa tar
The supreme worship on the Buddhas,
dak kyang yongsu kyobpé chir
Bestow it now upon me,
namkhé dorjé deng dak tsol
O Vajra Space, for my salvation.8
8. The Actual Bestowal of Empowerment
There are four parts.
i. The Vase Empowerment
rigdzin düpa lama nangsi zilnön gyi mintsam kyi dzöpu lé den sum tsangwé kyilkhor gyi khorlo
namkha gangwar trö té
From the tuft of hair at the point between the eyebrows of the guru ‘Prevailing Over All That
Appears and Exists’ of the Vidyādhara Assembly, the wheel of the maṇḍala of the three seats
of completeness emanates and fills the sky.
rigpé lhamo nam kyi trashipé nampa duma dangché té changchub sem kyi dütsi chiwo né wangkurwar
gyur
The consort-goddesses adorned with various auspicious symbols pour the nectar of bodhicitta
on the crown of your head, empowering you.
Touch your head with the skull-vase and say:
hung, tashi bumpa lhé shyalyé
Hūṃ. In the divine palace of the auspicious vase
lha dang nyimé dütsi chü
Is the amṛta water indivisible from the deities,
kalden bu la wangkurwé
Through which you, fortunate child, are empowered.
nang shyen lha kü chakgyar dzog
May clinging to appearances be perfected as the mudrā of the deities' form,
nammin rigdzin nyertob ching
So that you attain the level of a matured vidyādhara
küntu ö kyi sa nön shog
And reach the stage of universal radiance.
om ah hung benza maha guru sarva siddhi hum | kaya abhikintsa om
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra-māha-guru sarva siddhi hūṃ | kayābhiṣiñca oṃ
shyé sung shing wang kurwé dewa chenpö dütsi lü kyi nang tamché gang
In this way you are empowered, and the amṛta of great bliss completely fills your body.
tamal nang shyen gyi drima bakchak dang chepa jang
It purifies the stains of clinging to appearances as ordinary, including the habitual tendencies.
pung kham kyemché yongdrub den sum tsangwa rigdzin gyutrul drawé kyilkhor gyi khorlor minpar
jé
Your aggregates, elements and sense sources mature as the Illusory Net, the wheel of the maṇḍala
of the consummate vidyādharas of the three seats of completeness.
chü lhakma chiwor tenpa lé deshyin shekpa rik ngé ur gyenpar gyur
The remaining liquid settles at the crown of your head and transforms into the crown of the
five tathāgata families.
wang gi lha nam kyang rangnyi la timpar gyur
The empowerments deities dissolve into you as well.
dé nangtong ku dorjé lamé kyilkhor du bumpé wang tob
With this, you have—within the guru maṇḍala of the empty-appearances of the vajra body—received
the vase empowerment .
lü kyi lé dang tsa yi dribpa dak
Karma of the body and obscurations of the channels are purified.
ku dorjé jinlab shyuk
The blessing of the vajra-body has entered you.
kyerim gyi nö du gyur
You have become a suitable vessel for generation phase practice.
nammin rigdzin gyi sabön teb
The seed of the matured vidyādhara has been planted within you.
tulkü gopang gi kalpa gyü la shyak go
You have gained the fortune to realize the nirmāṇakāya.
ii. Secret Empowerment
lama dorjé chang yabyum gyi nampé nyompar shyukpé dütsi changsem ngö su sam la yum gyi kha sang
né langwar mö la
Consider that the amṛta from the union of the guru vajradhara and his consort is the actual
bodhicitta and receive it from the secret space of the consort.
While giving the secret substance:
hung, yabyum jorwé changchub sem
Hūṃ. Red and white bodhicitta flows from the point of union
kar mar bhendé nang du kyil
Of the male deity and consort, and fills the skull-cup.
kalden bu la wangkurwé
With it, fortunate child, you are empowered.
tsa kham yigé nampardak
May your channels and elements be matured into syllables,
tsé la wangwé rigdzin tob
So that you attain the level of a vidyādhara with power over life
pema chen gyi sa nön shog
And reach the stage of the lotus of non-attachment.
om ah hung benza maha guru sarva siddhi hum | waka abhikintsa ah
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra-māha-guru sarva siddhi hūṃ | vākābhiṣiñca āḥ
shyepé dütsi nyangwé tsa tamché dütsi gang
Through tasting the amṛta, all your channels are filled with amṛta.
kham shyuwé dewé duk sum gyi toktsok jang
The bliss of the melting of the elements purifies all thoughts of the three times.
dé drak tong sung dorjé lamé kyilkhor du sangwé wang tob
With this, you have—within the guru maṇḍala of the empty-sounds of vajra speech—received the
secret empowerment.
ngak gi lé dang lung gi dribpa dak
Karma of the speech and obscurations of the wind-energy are purified.
sung dorjé jinlab shyuk
The blessing of vajra-speech has entered you.
dejö kyi nö du gyur
You have become a suitable vessel for mantra recitation.
tsewang rigdzin gyi sabön teb
The seed of the vidyādhara with power over life is planted within you.
longchö dzokpé gopang gi kalpa gyü la shyak go
You have gained the fortune to realize the saṃbhogakāya.
Connected with this is the transmission of the mantra:
dünkyé kyi tukka né ngak treng jung
From the heart of the front visualization arises the mantra garland.
dak kyé kyi shyal du shyuk
It enters through the mouth of the self-visualization,
tukké sabön la khöpar gyur
And arranges itself around the seed at the heart.
Recite the two root mantras, three times each:
om ah hung benza guru pema siddhi hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra-guru padma siddhi hūṃ
om ah hung benza maha guru sarva siddhi hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra-māha-guru sarva siddhi hūṃ
iii. Knowledge-Wisdom Empowerment
wangsumpé ledu
In order to receive the third empowerment:
rigdzin lamé tukka né zuk dang langtso denpé rik ma rik kyi yum gyi ngowochen trö té tarpa tenpar
kulwar gyur
From the heart of the vidyādhara guru the youthful and alluring consort—whose nature is that
of the female buddha families—emanates. I urge her to serve as the support for liberation.
While holding the empowerment card of the consort:
hung, chö nam kün gyi jungné ni
Hūṃ. The source of all phenomena
dewa chenpo sangwé yum
Is the secret mother-consort of great bliss.
rik kyi bu la jinpa yi
By presenting her to you, fortunate child,
ga shyi yeshe ngön du gyur
May you actualize the wisdom of the four joys,
chakgya chenpö rigdzin to
So that you attain the level of a mahāmudrā vidyādhara
khorlo tsokchen sa nön shog
And reach the stage of Great Cloud Mass of Rotating Syllables!9
om ah hung benza maha guru sarva siddhi hum | tsitta abhikintsa hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra-māha-guru sarva siddhi hūṃ | cittābhiṣiñca hūṃ
With the three perceptions, enact the samaya of great enjoyment.
Consider that with 'a ho mahāsukhaḥ' bliss is used as the skilful means through which innate
bliss is stabilized definitively.
om sarva tathagata maha anuragan jnana benza sobhava atma ko hang
oṃ sarva-tathāgata mahānuraga vajra-svabhāvātmako ’ham
dé detong tuk dorjé lamé kyilkhor du sherab yeshe kyi wang tob
With this, you have—within the guru maṇḍala of the empty-bliss of vajra mind—received the insight-wisdom
empowerment.
yi kyi lé dang tiklé dribpa dak
Karma of the mind and obscurations of the essences are purified.
tuk dorjé jinlab shyuk
The blessing of vajra-mind has entered you.
detong tsenda li nö du gyur
You have become a suitable vessel for the bliss-emptiness of caṇḍāli practice.
chakgyé rigdzin gyi sabön teb
The seed of the mahāmudrā vidyādhara is planted within you.
chökü gopang tobpé kalpa gyü la shyak go
You have gained the fortune to realize the dharmakāya.
iv. The Ultimate Empowerment
wang shyipé ledu
In order to receive the fourth empowerment:
tab lé jungwé pé yeshe kyi tsönpé chönyi dön gyi lamé gongpa la nyampar shyak té
Rest in the meditative equipoise of reality, the wisdom of the absolute guru that was illustrated
by the example wisdom arisen from skilful means.
Give the symbolic indication with the crystal and the mirror.
ho, kadak melong tsangmé ngog
Hoḥ. On the surface of the clear mirror of primordial purity
lhündrub dang shel drimé sal
The stainless crystal of spontaneous presence is reflected.
datak dzokpé wangkurwé
Through this empowerment in which symbolic indications are complete,
drimé rigpé neluk tog
May you realize the natural state of immaculate awareness,
lhündrub rigdzin nyertob né
So that you attain the level of a spontaneously accomplished vidyādhara
dewa chenpö sa nön shog
And reach the stage of great bliss.
om ah hung benza maha guru sarva siddhi hum | dharmadhatu abhikintsa ah
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra-māha-guru sarva siddhi hūṃ | dharmadhātu-abhiṣiñca āḥ
shyé ngo trepa la ten né dön gyi rigdzin lama maha guru dewa chenpo riktong lhenchik kyepé yeshe
nampar mitokpé ngowo nyi soso rangrig pé tsul gyi nyam su nyongwar sam la neluk machöpé
ying su nyampar shyak
Through this introduction you experience—with your own natural awareness—the absolute vidyādhara-guru,
the mahāguru of great bliss, the simultaneously arisen wisdom of awareness and
emptiness whose nature is non-conceptual. Rest with meditative equipoise in the space of the
unaltered natural state.
dé riktong yeshe lamé kyilkhor du tsik gi tsönpa döndam gyi wang tob
As indicated by these words, you have—within the guru maṇḍala of the empty-awareness of primordial
wisdom— received the ultimate empowerment.
künshyi lé dang shejé dribpa dak
Karma of the all-ground and cognitive obscurations are purified.
yeshe dorjé jinlab shyuk
The blessing of vajra-wisdom has entered you.
kadak dzogpachenpö nö du gyur
You have become a suitable vessel for the primordial purity of the Great Perfection.
lhündrub rigdzin gyi sabön teb
The seed of the spontaneously accomplished vidyādhara is planted within you.
tartuk gi drebu ngowo nyi kü gopang gi kalpa gyü la shyak go
You have gained the fortune to realize ultimate fruition of the svabhāvikakāya.
In this way, the stages of entering the maṇḍala by yourself are completed. Additionally I should
mention that until you recognise that all appearances of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa—appearance,
sound and awareness—are purified within the space of the inexhaustible wheel of ornament,
the three vajra secrets of the guru, there is great need for, and immense benefit in,
doing this self-initiation: it restores the power of the four empowerments, heals impairments
and breakages of enlightened body, speech and mind, and offers a training in maturing
through self-entry to the maṇḍala; and so the tantras and accomplished adepts have lauded
the practice [of self-initiation]  again and again.
III. The Concluding Stages
Pledge to maintain the samayas:
tsawa ku sung tuk chok dang
All the supreme root samayas of body, speech and mind,
yenlak damtsik nyishu nga
The twenty-five branch samayas,
mé dang chikpu chalwa sog
And the Great Perfection samayas such as absence, oneness, and suffusion,
choga shyindu sungwar gyi
I pledge to maintain in the proper way.
Three times.
Offer a maṇḍala out of gratitude.
sa shyi pö chü juk shing métok tram
The ground is purified with scented water and strewn with flowers.
rirap ling shyi nyi dé gyenpa di
It is adorned with Sumeru, the king of mountains, the four quarters of the universe, and the
sun and the moon;
sangyé shying du mik té pulwa yi
Thinking of it as the blessed buddha-fields, I offer it.
dro kun namdak shying la chöpar shok
By virtue of this offering, may all beings here and now attain the happiness of that pure land!
tram guru ratna mandala pudza megha samudra saparana samayé ah hung
tram guru-ratna-maṇḍala-pūjā-megha-samudra-spharaṇa-samaye āḥ hūṃ
tsowö jitar ka tsalpa
Whatever the guru, chief of the maṇḍala, commands,
dedak tamché dak gi gyi
I shall carry out—each and every instruction.
khyé la dak kyang yongsu bul
I offer myself to you completely.
lobmar zung né ché du sol
Please take me as your disciple and make use of me.
Three times.
To conclude, recite prayers of dedication and aspiration and turn the wheel of the feast, as
it is usually done.
gyal kün lamé yeshe té
This is an excellent skilful method, delightful and easy to practice,
dé yi dorjé sum gyi jin
To swiftly invoke the blessing of the three vajras
nyur beb tab tsul juk dé chi
Of the unsurpassable wisdom of the all the victorious ones.
kalzang kün gé pal gyur chik
May it become the glory that delights the fortunate ones!

While we were performing the guru practice of the Vidyādhara Assembly in a group (through which
we blessed appearance and existence as the maṇḍala of amṛta) at the monastery of Kunzang
Tekchok Ösal Ling, situated in the vast medicinal forests of the hidden land of Khentali
in south Bhutan,10 a text such as this was needed, and so I, the fortunate Jigme Khyentse
Özer, born in a time when the teachings of the heart-essence of luminosity are in their
final period, wrote this down inspired by the illuminating writings of the Omniscient Guru.
May it become the cause for all beings to actually attain awakening in the space of the
unsurpassed wisdom of Samantabhadra. Sarvadā maṅgalam!

| Translated by Han Kop and edited by Aaron Coote, 2021, for the Longchen Nyingtik Project.
With gratitude to Tulku Dawa Rinpoche for his clarifications.

Source: 'Jigs med gling pa. "klong chen snying gi thig le las/ bla ma rig 'dzin 'dus pa'i bdag
'jug rdo rje'i byin 'bebs", in klong chen snying thig rtsa pod. 5 Vols. BDRC W1KG13585.
Bodhnath, Kathmandu and Bodhgaya, Bihar: Shechen Publications, 1994. Vol. 4: 193-204.

Version: 1.0-20210921
↑ Clarifying the Essential Meaning: The General Meaning of Empowerment, from the Heart-Essence
of the Vast Expanse↑ Tib. Tenma, bstan ma↑ https://www.lotsawahouse.org/tibetan-masters/jigme-lingpa/rigdzin-dupa-gabjang↑
Khenpo Sonam Tsewang explains that outsiders here refers
to all those spirits who are excluded from the maṇḍala.↑ The full form of this and the
preceding mantra appear in Kongtrul’s empowerment manual The Cascading Essence of Great Bliss
https://www.lotsawahouse.org/tibetan-masters/jamgon-kongtrul/yumka-empowerment-cascading-essence-great-bliss↑
Skt. Sugata.↑ Khenpo Sonam Tsewang says that this line is perhaps
better read as བསྟན་པ་མཐོང་བར་བསམ་, and so we have translated it as such.↑ This verse is from
the Guhyasamāja Tantra, Chapter 16, verse 41. We have followed the translation of Fremantle,
Francesca, ''A Critical Study of the Guhyasamāja Tantra'', Ph.D. dissertation, University
of London (1971). See p.115 for the English and p.359 for the critical edition of this
verse. The Sanskrit is as follows: bodhivajreṇa buddhānāṃ yathā datto mahāmahaḥ | mamāpi
trāṇanārthāya khavajrādya dadāhi me |.↑ I.e., the thirteenth of the sixteen stages according
to the Nyingma system of inner tantras. See https://www.rigpawiki.org/index.php?title=Sixteen_bhumis↑
Lobpön Jigme from Shechen says this monastery is in Gelephu, a town in south
Bhutan on the Indian border.