Supplication to the Lineage of the Heart Essence of the Vast Expanse
compiled by Kyabje Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche

Prayer to the Gurus of the Lineage
kunzang dorsem garab shiri sing
Samantabhadra, Vajrasattva, Garab Dorje, Śrī Siṃha,
pema kara jebang nyishu nga
Padmākara and the twenty five disciples—king and subjects,
so zur nub nyak tertön gyatsa sok
So, Zur, Nub, Nyang,1 the hundred treasure-revealers and all the rest—
kater lama nam la solwa deb
Gurus of kama and terma, I supplicate you.
Prayer to Longchenpa
dzamling dzepé gyen druk chok nyi dang
Just like the Six Ornaments and Two Supreme Ones who beautify our world,
tukjé lungtok nyampé tu nga yang
You were their equal in your mastery of compassion, learning and realization,
naktrö dampar bepé tulshyuk kyi
Yet you practised hidden in the forest in sacred solitude.
khordé chökur dzokpé longchenpa
Longchenpa, who perfected saṃsāra and nirvāṇa in the state of dharmakāya,
drimé özer shyab la solwa deb
Drimé Özer—Stainless Light—at your feet I supplicate.
Prayer to Jigme Lingpa
shécha kun khyen dro la jétséi ter
The source of love and compassion for all beings, who knows all that is knowable,
trimé özer yangtrul tuk ter dzö
You are the emanation of Longchenpa, and heir to a treasury of mind termas;
ösal longchen namkhé naljorpa
Sky-like yogin of the vast expanse of luminosity,
jikmé lingpé shyap la solwa dep
Jigme Lingpa, at your feet I supplicate.
Prayer to First Dodrupchen, Jigme Trinle Özer
dü sum künkhyen pema jungné dang
Emanation of the great tertön Sangye Lingpa,
yermé terchen sangye lingpa yi
Who was indivisible from Padmasambhava, knower of the three times,
yangtrul bepé naljor zol dralwa
You are free of deceit and a hidden yogi—
jikme trinlé özer solwa deb
Jigme Trinle Özer, I supplicate you.
Prayer to Jigme Gyalwe Nyugu
pakpa jikten wangchuk tukjé trul
Compassionate emanation of the Noble Lord of the World,2
drowa tar ling dröpé depön chok
You are the most excellent guide, leading beings to the isle of liberation,
dreltsé dönden longchen naljorpa
Yogin of the vast expanse, benefiting all you encounter—
jikme gyalwé nyugur solwa deb
Jigme Gyalwe Nyugu, I supplicate you.
Prayer to the Fourth Dzogchen Rinpoche, Mingyur Namkhe Dorje
dü sum gyalwé chi zuk pémajung
Padmasambhava, embodiment of all buddhas, past, present and future,
jalü dorjéi ku nyé bimala
And Vimalamitra, who attained the indestructible rainbow body—
yermé tukjé chik tu düpé pal
You are inseparable from them, the splendid embodiment of their compassion,
mingyur namkhé dorjer solwa dep
Mingyur Namkhe Dorje, I supplicate you.
Prayer to Gyalse Shenpen Taye
gyalsé kün gyi dröpa chikpü lam
Having realized the altruistic mind of bodhicitta,
shyenpen changchub sem su ngepé tsul
The sole path traversed by the all the bodhisattvas, exactly as it is,
jishyin tok né tayé drowa la
You reveal it to limitless beings—
tön dzé drinchen lamar solwa deb
Benevolent guru, I supplicate you.
Prayer to Do Khyentse
ngöndzok shying na traktung heruka
In the Truly Perfected Realm you are the heruka,
ngayab ling na pema tötreng tsal
In Cāmara, Powerful Lotus Garland of Skulls,3
bhoté jong su jalü dorjé shyab
In Tibet, the honourable Jalü Dorje—
jikme yeshe dorjér solwa deb
Jigme Yeshe Dorje, I supplicate you.
Prayer to Patrul Rinpoche
chitar gyalwé sepo shyiwalha
Outwardly, you are the bodhisattva Śāntideva,
nangtar drubpé wangchuk shawari
Inwardly, the lord of siddhas Śavari,
sangwa pakchok dukngal rangdrol ngö
Secretly, the supremely noble Natural Liberation of Suffering4 in person—
jikme chökyi wangpor solwa deb
Jigme Chökyi Wangpo, I supplicate you.
Prayer to Khenpo Pema Vajra
gyü sum rigdzin lha dang khandro yi
Through the blessing of the vidyādharas of the three lineages,
jinlab pöpé mindrol dam zab kyi
Deities and ḍākinīs, you became heir of the profound instructions that mature and liberate.
sol nyé gyü dzin kabab dön dangden
Holder of the modes of transmission—
pema benza shyab la solwa deb
Pema Vajra, I supplicate at your feet.
Prayer to Khyentse Wangpo
pakyul drubpé lobpön manjushri
In the noble land you were the accomplished master Mañjuśrīmitra,
gangjong jampal yang ngö trisong jé
In the Land of Snow, Lord Tri Songdetsen—Mañjuśrī in person,
dengdir künkhyen chö kyi gyalpo dang
Now, you are indivisible from the omniscient King of the Dharma—
yermé khyen tsé wangpor solwa deb
Khyentse Wangpo, I supplicate you.
Prayer to Jamgön Kongtrul
sheja künzik yönten gyatsö ter
Knower of all, treasury of an ocean of qualities,5
gyalwé lungten lodrö tayé shyab
Lodrö Taye, the one prophesied by the Victorious One;
rik künkhyab dak pema gar gyi wang
Pema Gargyi Wangpo, holder of all lineages,
dzam ling shingta chenpor solwa deb
Great Charioteer of the world, I supplicate you.
Prayer to Mipham Rinpoche
riktong jampal shyönnü jinlab lé
Through the blessings of the youthful Mañjuśrī, awareness and emptiness conjoined,
gongpé long lé pobpé ter gyé drol
The eight treasures of confidence arose from the expanse of your realization,
lungtok chö dzö gyatsö ngadak ché
Master of ocean-like Dharma treasures of transmission and realization—
adzita bidzaya solwa deb
Ajita Vijaya (Mipham Namgyal), I supplicate you.
Prayer to Orgyen Tendzin Norbu
orgyen rigdzin chenpö ringluk kyi
Holder of the victory banner of the teachings of learning and practice
shedrub tenpé gyaltsen dzin dzé ching
In the lineage of the great vidyādhara of Uḍḍiyāna—
yönten norbu dzö nga chö kyi jé
Lord of Dharma, you are truly a treasury of precious qualities,
palden lamé shyab la solwa deb
Glorious guru, I supplicate you.
Prayer to Adzom Drukpa Drodul Pawo Dorje
khordé chö kün ösal chenpor dak
Having purified saṃsāra and nirvāṇa within luminosity,
natsok trulpa zangtal ying su zé
You caused the various manifestations of delusion to fade within the space of utter transparency
rangdrol chö zé gong long ngöngyur pa
And realized natural liberation, the exhaustion of phenomena, within the expanse of wisdom—
gar wang shyepé dorjér solwa deb
Garwang Shyepe Dorje, I supplicate you.
Prayer to the Third Dodrupchen Jigme Tenpe Nyima
jikme tek chok chö kyi khorlö gyur
Fearlessly you turned the wheel of the supreme vehicle’s teaching;
shedrub tenpé nyima tamché khyen
Omniscient Sun of the Teachings of study and practice,
ösal dorjé nyingpö ten sokdzin
You hold the life-force of the luminous, indestructible essence—
künkhyen khedrub wangpor solwa deb
All-knowing lord of scholars and adepts, I supplicate you.
Prayer to Könchok Drakpa6
jikme kater tenpé shingta ché
Fearless charioteer of kama and terma, lord of scholars and adepts,
kunzang pemé ringluk zabgyé kyi
With your brilliant mind you opened the gateways of the maturing and liberating instructions
mindrol gojé losal khedrub wang
Of the ever-excellent Padmasambhava’s lineage—
könchok drakpé shyab la solwa deb
Könchok Drakpa, I supplicate you.
Prayer to Shechen Gyaltsab Gyurme Pema Namgyal
ngé sang nyingpö tenpé dzö dzinpé
Magnificent and glorious lord, by upholding the treasury of the teachings of the definitive,
secret essence,
gong da nyengyü lamé tsok nam kyi
You became the sole embodiment of the wisdom all of the gurus
yeshe chik tu dompé chi pal chok
Of the direct, symbolic and ear-whispered traditions—
orgyen tuk chok dorjé ra solwa deb
Orgyen Tukchok Dorje, I supplicate you.
Prayer to Nyoshul Lungtok Tenpe Nyima
chö gyé düpa ronyom ngang du shyik
By realizing all things to be of one taste, you released the knots of the eight worldly dharmas.
löjé rimo kadak ying su yal
Within the primordially pure expanse, mentally created images dissolved
dzogpachenpö neluk ngönsum zik
And you directly beheld the Great Perfection’s way of abiding—
lungtok tenpé nyimar solwa deb
Lungtok Tenpe Nyima, I supplicate you.
Prayer to Khenpo Ngawang Palzang
sa chok kyilkhor ngöngyur bimala
Ngakgi Wangpo, the indivisible union of
kunzang chökü tönpa longchenpa
Vimalamitra, who actualized the maṇḍala of the supreme stage, and
yermé ngak gi wangpor solwa deb
Longchenpa, the teacher of Samantabhadra’s truth-body:
tuk yi chik tu drepar jingyi lob
I supplicate you! Pray bless me that our minds may merge as one.
Prayer to Dzongsar Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö
chitar gyalsé chökyi lodrö jé
Outwardly, you are the bodhisattva, the lordly Chökyi Lodrö,
nangtar lobpön shenyen shyab
Inwardly, the master Mañjuśrīmitra,
sangwa tsen dzok heruka pal la
Secretly, the glorious Heruka, perfect in qualities—
nying né soldeb dak gyü jingyi lob
I supplicate you from depths of my heart: please bless my mind.
Prayer to Shechen Kongtrul Pema Drimé Lekpé Lodrö
kunzang pemé gyaltsab rigpa dzin
Representative of the ever-excellent Padmasambhava, Vidyādhara Lodrö Taye,
lodrö tayé tukjé özer lé
Whose compassionate mind radiates with rays of light,
yong shar shyenpen trinlé tayé dang
Inducing vast altruistic activity and manifesting
palden lamé shyab la solwa deb
As our glorious lama—at your feet I supplicate.

tsul né sen sam gyatsö patar chin
Having crossed the ocean of discipline, listening and contemplation,
shedrub nangwé tubten salwar dzé
You illuminate the Teachings of the Sage with the light of study and practice.
kalzang küngai nyen gyur drowé gön
Friend who delights fortunate disciples, protector of beings;
chö kyi gyaltsen lamar solwa deb
Guru who raises high the victory banner of Dharma, I supplicate you.

kunzang degyal tubten chödor dang
Kunzang Degyal,7 Tubten Chödor,8
guna pema dechen künga pal
Guṇa,9 Pema Dechen,10 Künga Pal,11
tekchok loden jamyang tendzin dang
Tekchok Loden,12 Jamyang Tendzin13
tubten chöpel nam la solwa deb
And Thubten Chöpel14—I supplicate you.
Prayer to Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche
dadral khedrub gyatsö jesu zung
Cared for by an ocean of masters, unrivalled in their learning and accomplishment,
rimé tubpé ten la tö sam dzé
You studied and contemplated impartially on the Teachings of the Sage
ten dror lhakpé sem kyi gocha chen
Armoured with the altruistic wish to benefit the teachings and beings—
jikme khyentsé özer la solwa deb
Jigme Khyentse Özer, I supplicate you.
Prayer to the Root Guru
womin chö kyi ying kyi podrang na
Within the dharmadhātu palace of Akaniṣṭha
dü sum sangye kün gyi ngowo nyi
Is the intrinsic nature of all the buddhas of the three times.
rangsem chöku ngönsum tön dzepé
Honourable root guru, you who directly introduced me
tsawé lama shyab la solwa deb
To the dharmakāya nature of my mind, I supplicate you.

This lineage supplication is an arrangement, based on the tradition of the masters of the past,
wherein all the gurus of the lineage are gathered together. It is suitable to be used
for any  ritual of the Heart Essence.

| Translated by Sean Price and Han Kop, 2021, for the Longchen Nyingtik Project.

Source: "snying thig bla brgyud gsol 'debs gsung rgyun ma" in 'jigs med gling pa/ . klong chen
snying thig rtsa pod/. BDRC W1KG13585. 5 vols. Bodhnath, Kathmandu and Bodhgaya, Bihar:
Shechen Publications, [1994]. Vol. 4: 1–8

Version: 1.2-20220128
↑ These are So Yeshe Wangchuk, Zurchen Shakya Jungne, Nubchen Sangye Yeshe and Nyang Ral Nyima
Özer. Other versions of this verse have Nyak in place of Nyang, referring to Nyak Jñānakumāra.↑
I.e., Avalokiteśvara↑ I.e., Pema Tötreng Tsal, a name of Padmasambhava.↑ One of the
names of Avalokiteśvara.↑ Ocean of Qualities (Yönten Gyatso) is one of the several names
of Jamgön Kongtrul. Two other names are mentioned in this supplication, Lodrö Taye and Pema
Gargyi Wangpo.↑ Probably https://treasuryoflives.org/biographies/view/Konchok-Drakpa/11445↑
Probably Kunzang Dechen Dorje aka Pema Kunzang or Tsamtrul Rinpoche (ca.1845–ca.1925),
an incarnation of Jigme Gyalwe Nyugu recognized by the Fourth Dzogchen Rinpoche. He stayed
at Dzagyal Monastery. https://www.tbrc.org/#!rid=P8435.↑ The Fifth Dzogchen Drubwang,
Tubten Chokyi Dorje, 1872–1935.↑ Khenpo Yeshe Gyaltsen says that Guṇa refers to Gemang Khenpo
Yönten Gyatso (19th-20th C.).↑ Probably the Third Mura Tulku Pema Dechen Zangpo of Kilung
Monastery.↑ Derge Lama  Jadralwa Kunga Pelden, 1878–1944.↑ Khenchen Pema Tekchok Loden,
the 20th Abbot of Dzogchen Monastery (rdzogs chen mkhan rabs 20), 1879–1955. https://treasuryoflives.org/biographies/view/Pema-Tekchok-Loden/9585↑
Khenchen Tekchok Jamyang Tendzin
from Gemang (mkhan chen theg mchog 'jam dbyangs bstan 'dzin). See Brilliant Moon, page 85.↑
Khenchen Thubten Chöpel aka Thubga Yishyin Norbu, 1886–1956.