The Refined Essence of Compassion
A Daily Sādhana for the Natural Liberation of Suffering, the Secret Practice of the Great Compassionate
One
by Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche

Namo lokeśvarāya!
For those who wish to practise the daily version of the secret practice of the Natural Liberation
of Suffering1 from the Great Perfection Heart Essence of the Vast Expanse,2it is as
follows:
Lineage Prayer
pema heruka yi gongpa yi
The blessing of the wisdom mind of Padma Heruka
wang gi lhamo nagarjuna dang
Passed from Indradevī and Nāgārjuna,
pema jungné bardu jinlab té
Down to Padmākara:
dé dang majön danta dü sum gyi
Masters of the lineage of wisdom speech,
sung gi gyüpé lama la solwa deb
Of the past, present and future―to you I pray!
orgyen pema jungné la solwa deb
To the Lotus-born Guru of Uḍḍiyāna, I pray!
Taking Refuge and Arousing Bodhicitta
namo, tamé khorwa dukngal rangshyin la
Namo! In this never-ending cycle of saṃsāra, which is by nature suffering,
wangmé chöpé dak sok semchen kun
I and all other beings helplessly roam about.
chok sum ngowo pakchok tukjé lhar
From the depths of my heart and with utmost longing
nying né dungshuk drakpö kyab su chi
I take refuge in the embodiment of the Three Jewels—the supremely noble Lord of Compassion.
Three times
ho, pama rik druk nyingjé yul gyur kün
Hoḥ! All sentient beings of the six classes—my very own parents—the objects of my compassion,
rang ngo mashé trulpé lé la chö
Do not recognize the nature of their minds and act out of delusion.
tsemé nyingjé changchub lam gö chir
So that, with immeasurable compassion, I might set beings on the path to awakening,
mönjuk döndam semchok kyepar gyi
I generate the supreme mind of bodhicitta, relative—in aspiration and action—and absolute.
Three times
hrih, chö kün mimik shyimé tsadral ngang
Hrīḥ! From within the state without ground or basis, where all phenomena are free of conceptual
reference,
yingrik zungjuk dakpa chenpö shying
The union of basic space and awareness arises as the realm of great purity.
rangnang lhündrub riwo potala
My entire perception, spontaneously perfect, is the Potala Mountain
datak tsennyi dzokpé kyilkhor ü
With symbols, signs and characteristics perfect within the maṇḍala. In its centre
natsok pema tongden nyidé teng
Is a multi-coloured, thousand-petalled lotus, and sun and moon disk seats.
hrih lé rangnyi pakchok nyingjé lha
From hrīḥ, I arise as the Noble One of divine compassion,
dukngal rangdrol chenrezik wang ku
In the form of Lord Avalokiteśvara ‘Natural Liberation of Suffering’,
shyal chik chak shyi nyampé tab kyi shyeng
With one face and four hands and standing in a posture of equanimity.
tsawé chak nyi tukkar taljar tsul
The palms of my principal hands are joined at my heart
lhakma nam nyi drang treng pekar chang
And the remaining two hold a mālā and lotus.
Similar in posture to Khasarpaṇi.
longchö dzok ku dar dang rinchen dzé
I am in saṃbhogakāya form adorned with silks and jewels.
utsuk rikdak öpakmépé tsen
Above my head is Amitābha, the lord of the family.

chok shyir pema dab shyi den tengdu
In the four cardinal directions and each seated on a four-petalled lotus are:
shar du jetsün drolma kudok kar
Venerable Tārā, her body white in colour, in the East,
lho ru özerchenma ser gyi dok
Mārīcī, yellow in colour, in the South,
nub tu kurukullé pé rak dang
Kurukullā, ruby red in colour, in the West,
jang du norgyün lhamo kudok jang
And Vasudhārā, green in colour, in the North.
kün kyang rang rang gyen dang chaluk dzok
Their ornaments and garments are perfectly complete, each in their own respective style.

go shyir wangchen dé shyi lé dokchen
At the four doors are the four mighty ones in colours that match their particular activities.
driguk tö dzin dortab jik tsul ngam
All are in striding posture, majestic and terrifying, and hold hooked knives and skull-cups.
trowö ché dzok mepung long na gying
With wrathful ornaments, they are poised imposingly amidst masses of flame.
bar tsam sangye changsem rigdzin dang
In between, buddhas, bodhisattvas, vidyādharas,
pawo daki damchen trin tar tib
Virile ones3, ḍākinīs and samaya-bound Dharma protectors gather like clouds.
nangtong drib yok dralwé ying na sal
They arise as appearance and emptiness, vividly present in unobscured space.
kün kyang né sum yikdru sum gyi tsen
The deities' three centres are marked with the three seed syllables,
dé lé ö trö rangshyin né chok dang
From which light streams out to the natural, supreme abodes,
khyepar trulpé shyingkham potala
And especially to the nirmāṇakāya pure land of Potala,
neyul nyershyi durtrö gyé sok né
Twenty-four sacred places and eight charnel grounds,
yeshe lhatsok benza samadza
Inviting the wisdom deities. Vajra-samājaḥ!
om lokishora guru deva dakini sarva samaya dza dza
oṃ lokeśvara-guru-deva-ḍākinī-sarva-samaya jaḥ jaḥ
Requesting the deities to take their places
benza samaya tishta ho
vajra-samaya tiṣṭha hoḥ
Homage
namo purushaya ho
namo puruṣāya hoḥ
Offering
om benza argham padam pupé dhupé aloké gendhé nevidé shapta | rupa shabta gendhé rasa parshé
maha sarva pudza khahi
oṃ vajra-arghaṃ pādyaṃ puṣpe dhūpe āloke gandhe naivedye śabda rūpa śabda gandha rāsa sparśa
mahā sarva pūja khāhi
sarva pentsa rakta balingta maha sukha dharmadhatu pudza ho
sarva-pañca rakta baliṅta mahā-sukha dharmadhātu pūjā hoḥ
Praise
hrih, chöying tröpa dralwé podrang né
Hrīḥ! You arise from the dharmadhātu palace of sheer simplicity
lhündrub longchö dzokpé nga wangchen
With mastery over the spontaneously present saṃbhogakāya―
tsemé nyingjé terchen chenrezik
Avalokiteśvara, great treasure of immeasurable compassion,
dukngal rangdrol ku la chaktsal tö
In your form as Natural Liberation of Suffering: to you I offer praise and homage.
Mantra Recitation
rangnyi tukjé chenpö tukka ru
I am the Great Compassionate One. In my heart
nyidé ga'u khajor yangpé ü
In the middle of a vast casket of joined sun and moon,
dawé teng na tuk sok hrih karpo
Upon a moon disc is the white life-force syllable hrīḥ,
dé tar yigé dünpé korwa lé
Encircled by the seven syllables of the mantra.
ö trö sangye changsem tamché dang
Light radiates out to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas,
khyepar tukjé chenpö tukgyü kul
Especially the Great Compassionate One, and invokes their wisdom minds.
dro druk semchen kün gyi lé nyön jang
Light streams out to all six classes of beings, purifying their karma and destructive emotions.
özer tsur dü dak la timpa yi
The rays return and dissolve into me,
chok dang tünmong ngödrub tobpar mik
Through which I obtain accomplishments, ordinary and supreme.
Imbued with compassion for beings, recite the mantra:
om mani padmé hung hrih
oṃ maṇi padme hūṃ hrīḥ
Longevity practice:
[om mani padmé hung hrih] taré ayurjnana tsé droom nri dza soha
[oṃ maṇi padme hūṃ hrīḥ] tāre ayur-jñāna tshe bhrūṃ nṛ ja svāhā
For overcoming obstructing forces and increasing merit:
[om mani padmé hung hrih] arya maritsyai mam soha
[oṃ maṇi padme hūṃ hrīḥ] ārya-mārīcyai māṃ svāhā
For magnetizing the three worlds:
[om mani padmé hung hrih] kurukullé hrim hrim washam kuru yé soha
[oṃ maṇi padme hūṃ hrīḥ] kurukulle hrīṃ hrīṃ vaśaṃ kuruye svāhā
For filling the treasury with wealth
[om mani padmé hung hrih] mama vasudhari soha
[oṃ maṇi padme hūṃ hrīḥ] mama vasudhāri svāhā
Confession of Mistakes
hung, tukjé chenpö kyilkhor du
Hūṃ! In this maṇḍala of the Great Compassionate One,
chödzé ma tsang drubpa yel
If my offerings were incomplete, my practice inattentive,
tingdzin jing muk tib lasok
Or my meditation drowsy, dull and lifeless—
galtrul nongpa zöpar sol
Please forgive all such confusions and mistakes!
om benza sato….
oṃ vajrasattva samayam anupālaya vajrasattva-tvenopa-tiṣṭha dṛḍho me bhava sutoṣyo me
bhava supoṣyo me bhava anurakto me bhava sarva-siddhiṃ me prayaccha sarva-karma śuca me cittaṃ
śreyaṅ-kuru hūṃ ha ha ha ha hoḥ bhagavān sarva-tathāgata-vajra mā me muñca vajrī-bhava
mahā-samaya-sattva āḥ
Dissolution
ho, chu lé chubur dolwa shyin
Hoḥ! Like bubbles appearing on water,
rang lé trulpé kyilkhor lha
The deities of the maṇḍala, created by myself,
yeshe ying su benza mu
Dissolve into the all-pervading space of primordial wisdom—vajra muḥ!
jetob gyumé lha kur dang
In the post-meditation, everything arises as the illusory body of the deity.
Dedication and Aspiration
ho, dü sum sakpé getsa kün
Ho! All the roots of virtue accumulated in past, present and future—
namkhyen dömé gyu ru ngo
I dedicate them to be the cause for realizing the primordial state of omniscience,
dak sok düpar chepa nam
So that I and all those gathered here
tsombu chik tu sangye shok
All attain enlightenment together, in one maṇḍala!
Three times.
Verses of Auspiciousness
ho, rigdzin gyüpé jinlab dang
Hoḥ! Through the blessing of the vidyādharas' lineage,
könchok sum gyi denpa dang
Through the truth of the Buddha, Dharma and Saṅgha,
sang ngak zabmö tendrel gyi
And through the auspicious interdependence of the profound Secret Mantra:
jikgyé shyiwé tashi shok
May all be auspicious for pacifying the eight fears!
tsesö gyepé tashi shok
May all be auspicious for developing life and merit!
nangwa wangdü tashi shok
May all be auspicious for bringing perception under our control!
lokdren tsarchö tashi shok
May all be auspicious for annihilating negative, misleading forces!
nang shyen lha kü chakgyar dzok
With all attachment to perception transformed and perfected as the form of the deity,
dra drak dechen ngak su dak
All sound purified into the great bliss of mantra,
dren tok ösal chökur min
All thoughts matured into the luminosity of dharmakāya—
jalü zangtal tashi shok
May all be auspicious, so that we attain the translucent rainbow body!

This was written by Maṅgala Śrībhūti at the request of Ama Karma Drolma.4

| Translated by Han Kop with the assistance of Stefan Mang, 2019.
↑ Tib. Dukngal Rangdrol (sdug bsngal rang grol).↑ Tib. Dzogpachenpo Longchen Nyingtik↑ Skt vīra;
Tib. dpa’ bo, sometimes translated as hero.↑ i.e., Yahne le Toumelin, the mother of Matthieu
Ricard.