The Swift Bestowal of Blessings
A Prayer to the Glorious Protector Guru
by Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche

om swasti
Oṃ svasti!
jampal yang sok rik sum gyal kün gyi
Embodiment of all the qualities of knowledge, power and love
khyen tsé nü pé chö kündüpé zuk
Of Mañjughoṣa and all the other conquerors of the three families,
tsokyé dorjé tuk kyi özer chü
Essence of radiant light from the Lake-Born Vajra’s heart,
lodrö pob tayé la solwa deb
With boundless intelligence and confidence—to you I pray.

deshek kün gyi sangwa mizé ying
In the basic space of the inexhaustible secrets of all the bliss-gone buddhas,
jampal yang sok palchen drubdé gyé
Including Mañjughoṣa and the eight great glorious sādhana deities,
kün gyi khyabdak gyundré chö kün gyi
You are the all-pervasive lord, the source of all causal and resultant phenomena,
jungné lodrö mejung solwa deb
Master of wondrous intelligence—to you I pray.

jam nyen tsenpé gyal kün yeshe ku
Your gentle form embodies the wisdom all the victorious ones with their marks and signs,
zabgyé yang nyen chö kyi dro kün drol
Your melodious voice proclaims the Dharma, vast and profound, which frees all beings,
khyentsé lodrö pakyé heruka
Heruka, whose wise and loving intelligence knows no bounds,
né sum khandrö mepor solwa deb
Forefather of the ḍākinīs of the three abodes—to you I pray.

tsa sum lha yi denpa mejung gi
Through the wondrous truth of the Three Root deities,
palden lama chimé yeshe zuk
May the glorious guru’s deathless wisdom form
nying gi pemor takten shyukpa dang
Remain forever in the lotus of my heart
tserab küntu jesu dzin gyur chik
And guide me throughout all my lives to come!

In Tharpa Ling, in the medicinal land of southern Bhutan, a wanderer by the name of Maṅgala
made this aspiration with a faithful mind on the eighth day of Saga Dawa, while making hundreds
of thousands of feast offerings. Siddhirastu! (By adapting the words of a long-life
prayer I had composed I transformed it into this supplication.)

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2021.

Source: bkra shis dpal 'byor. "dpal mgon bla ma'i gsol 'debs byin rlabs myur ster/" gsung 'bum/_rab
gsal zla ba. W21809. 25 vols. Delhi: Shechen Publications, 1994. Vol. 3: 72a–72b

Version: 1.0-20210924