The Quintessence of Marvellous Nectar
A Prayer Based on the Liberational Life of the Gentle Protector Guru
by Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche

chöying künkhyab khyen nyi yeshe sem
Wisdom embodiment of twofold omniscience pervading the dharmadhātu,
dakpé shying kün gyutrul gyatsö pal
Resplendent amidst an ocean of illusory forms in all the pure realms,
dak sok dul chir khorlö wangchuk tsul
You appeared in the form of a lord of the maṇḍala to tame the likes of me—
jamyang chökyi lodrö solwa deb
Jamyang Chökyi Lodrö, to you I pray.

pak bö tenpé shingta drang yé kyi
Khyentse Wangpo was the embodiment of the universal wisdom
yeshe chizuk khyentsé wangpo nyi
Of countless charioteers of the teachings from the Land of Āryas and Tibet.
samshyin ten drö pal du ku trul né
You were his intentional emanation, a splendour of the teachings and beings,
dorjé lung gi ngak la solwa deb
Praised in vajra prophecies—to you I pray.

dorjé den ngö kah tok chö kyi trir
You were installed on the dharma throne at Katok, the true Vajra Seat,
shyabpé kö ching künzik chö gyatsö
And the all-seeing Chökyi Gyatso1
dompa sum gyi tek chok gyaltab kö
Invested you with the supreme vehicle’s sovereignty of the three sets of vows.
sen sam namtar gyé la solwa deb
To you, in whom liberating study and contemplation flourished, I pray.

chinang rigpé né kün tuk su chü
You mastered all the outer and inner fields of knowledge,
ché tsö tsompé dakpé namtar kyang
And maintained a pure life of exposition, debate and composition.
mindrol chö kyi jungné ten chok gi
Source of maturing and liberating Dharma, sole charioteer
shingta chikpur gyur la solwa deb
Of the supreme teachings, to you I pray.

rim nyi tingdzin yönten nga wangjor
You mastered the qualities of two-stage samādhi,
zung dang pobpé terdzö ngö su drol
And unlocked a treasury of mnemonic retention (dhāraṇī) and courageous eloquence.
zabgyé dogyü sangwa zikpé tok
You saw the secret of the sūtras and tantras, profound and vast, and gained realization.
dzin pel düpé jepor solwa deb
Master of upholding, propagating and gathering, to you I pray.

kadam sar nying lamdré mar shang kyi
The teachings of the old and new Kadam, Lamdré, Marpa and Shangpa Kagyü,
kagyü shyi chö jo shyal dükhor lo
Pacifying (Zhijé), Severance (Chöd), Jonang and Zhalu Kālacakra,
ngagyur kater yongdzok lek sen ching
And the kama and terma of the Ancient Translations—you masterfully studied them all.
gangchen khyabpar pel la solwa deb
To you, who then disseminated them throughout the Land of Snows, I pray.

dön gyi pang tok pakpé gopang nyé
In reality, through elimination and realization, you attained the level of an ārya.
tsur tong dzepa chö dang tünpar tön
For those of limited vision, you displayed acts in accordance with the Dharma.
chö gyé nyemdral redok düpa drol
Uninvolved in the eight worldly concerns, you untied the knots of hope and fear.
trulshyik naljor wangchuk solwa deb
Delusion-conquering lord of yogins, to you I pray.

tsa sum lha yi gyé shyal dü künzik
You continually beheld the smiling faces of the deities of the Three Roots.
chö kyi go té jinlab gyün nyenpé
Through the doors of Dharma, entrustment, blessings and regular recitation,
dön nyi lhündrub ten drö gü selwé
You spontaneously accomplished the twofold benefit, like a great sun
pendé nyinjé chenpor solwa deb
Of benefit and happiness banishing troubles for the teachings and beings—to you I pray.

kunzang dorjé namtar tar sön té
When you reached the end of your ever-perfect vajra life of liberation,
tamé dzepa ngotsar ché té ten
You displayed your final act accompanied by wondrous signs.
lar yang ten dang lhakmé duljé chir
Then, once more, for the sake of the teachings and to train disciples who remained
trulpé nyinjé char la solwa deb
You arose in a sun-like emanation—to you I pray.

palgön lamé namtar jedren pé
By recalling your liberational life, O glorious protector guru,
solwa tab shyin dak gi ngön du gyur
And praying to you, may I gain the corresponding realization.
chi dzé lek tong mögü kya reng kyi
May the dawning devotion of seeing all your deeds as positive
gonggyü nyinjé nying la dren gyur chik
Draw the sun of mind-direct transmission into my heart.

gön khyö changchub ngön nyé tsul ten tsé
O protector, when you ultimately display the attainment of awakening,
nyewé sé su gyur né tuk dzö dzin
May I be there among your closest heirs and hold your wisdom treasury.
nyepa sum gyi tuk yi chik dré né
Through the three means of delight, may I blend my mind with your wisdom,
jam gön dzepa tadak drub nü shok
And may I be able to accomplish all the Gentle Protector’s enlightened deeds.

Thus, in response to a request, supported by a silk scarf, from the all-seeing precious master’s
own disciple Trogawa Sé Rinpoche of Gyangtse2 and from the monk Damchö Drakpa, I, Khyentse
Özer Tashi Paljor of Kham, who was cared for3 by the guru Mañjuvajra, wrote this and
offered prayers in the presence of the master’s precious relics. May it bring virtue and
excellence!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2022.

Sources
Bkra shis dpal 'byor. "'Jam mgon bla ma’i rnam thar gsol 'debs snying po ngo mtshar bdud rtsi’i
nying khu/" in gSung ʼbum rab gsal zla ba. 25 vols. Delhi: Shechen Publications, 1994.
Vol. 3: 70a–71a.
'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "'Jam mgon bla ma’i rnam thar gsol 'debs snying po ngo mtshar
bdud rtsi’i nying khu/" in 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung 'bum. 12 vols. Bir:
Khyentse Labrang, 2012. Vol. 3: 291–294

Version: 1.0-20220210
↑ Katok Situ Chökyi Gyatso (1880–1925).↑ Dr. Trogawa Rinpoche (1931–2005).↑ Following the Dilgo
Khyentse sungbum edition. The version in Jamyang Khyentse’s collected writings here omits
rjes.