The Lotus of Faith
A Supplication to the Successive Lives of Shechen Rabjam
by Shechen Rabjam Rinpoche

namo guru
Namo guru!
mönlam shyi drub tsok nyi pal gyi ji
You perfected the four aspirations1 and blaze with the majesty of the two accumulations,
deshek sharlhö shying gön nya ngen mé
Aśokaśrī, sugata of the south-easterly buddhafield,
tayé semchen duk sum shyidzé ching
You who pacify the three poisons of infinite beings,
khakhyab drowé gön gyur solwa deb
Protector for all throughout the reaches of space, I supplicate you.

ma la ya tser sangwé dakpo lé
At the peak of Mount Malaya, you received from Vajrapāṇi, Holder of Secrets,
kunzang gonggyü sang chen tadak nö
The teachings of the Great Secret, mind mandate of Samantabhadra,
lekpar ka dü malü tuk su chü
And, realising it perfectly, became its custodian—
nöjin karda dong la solwa deb
Yakṣa Ulkāmukha (Karda Dong), I supplicate you.

jampal nönpö yeshe gyumé trul
Magical, illusory manifestation of Mañjuśrītikṣṇa,
deshek ku yi kabab shenyen ché
Great spiritual friend who held the transmission of the Sugata Body2
ösal dzogchen dé sum tenpé sol
And arranged the teachings of the naturally luminous Great Perfection into three sections—3
jé khé mandzu mi trar solwa deb
Mañjuśrīmitra, I supplicate you.

dzambüling dir tönpé ring sel ngö
To house the sacred relics of the Teacher,
shyukpé chö dong gyé tri shyi tong shyeng
You built eighty-four thousand stūpas in this world
tönpé dzé jé né dang ten dar shul
And successfully sustained and spread his teachings—
sal dzé a sho kala solwa deb
Great illuminator, Aśoka, I supplicate you.

tsepö rik trung pemé tuk kyi zin
Born into the family of the king and guided by Padmasambhava,
lo pen kyechok nyenkur damchö gyur
You honoured sublime lotsāwas and paṇḍitas, supported Dharma translation,
gé chü sol zung ka tsik dri té shyak
And wrote an edict to promote the ten virtuous deeds—
gyalsé sé na lek la solwa deb
Prince Senalek, I supplicate you.

pemé jezung drubpé sa tor shek
You followed Padmasambhava, reached a lofty stage of accomplishment,
do dang gyutrul lasok ngak kyi shyung
And translated various tantric scriptures, such as the Do and Magical Display,4
nam mang gyur dzé dön gyi lotsawa
Genuine lotsāwa,
ma ben rinchen chok la solwa deb
Monk of Ma, Rinchen Chok, I supplicate you.5

tubpé gyaltsab shanta rakshité
The direct disciple of Śāntarakṣita, regent of the Muni,
ngölob gangjong gyalten nyok ma kün
A paṇḍita who used scripture and reasoning to eradicate
lung dang rigpé sal dzé pandita
Impurity from the Buddha's teaching in the Land of Snows—6
pemé ngang tsul shyab la solwa deb
Kamalaśīla, at your feet I supplicate.

gyé dzé lo tsé jezung chakgya ché
You followed Hevajra Lotsāwa7 and became
drubpé naljor drubgyü tenpé gyen
An accomplished yogin of Mahāmudrā, an ornament of the practice lineage's teaching,
gangjong drub gyé tsuk nor mi la jé
And crown jewel among hundreds of practitioners in the Land of Snow,
shyepa dorjé shyab la solwa deb
Lordly Milarepa Shepé Dorje, at your feet I supplicate.

khyen rab nangwé shejé chö künzik
With the light of intelligence you discerned all that can be known,
tsé chen tukjé tayé dulja kyong
With loving compassion you cared for countless disciples,
khé tsün drubpé drak nyen khyab dzepé
And your reputation for learning and righteousness spread far and wide—
rong tön chenpö shyab la solwa deb
Great Rongtön,8 at your feet I supplicate.

zabter kabab chakdzok tenpé dak
Holder of the transmission of profound termas, master of Dzogchen and Mahāmudrā,
jampal tröpé ngarö lok sé dé
Dharma-king of Drikung, who, with wrathful Mañjuśrī’s roar,
zilnön chö kyi gyalpo drigung pa
Overpowered all those whose attachment was misplaced—
rinchen püntsok shyab la solwa deb
Rinchen Puntsok,9 at your feet I supplicate.

orgyen nyendrub kagyü gongmé sol
You perfected the practice of approach and accomplishment from Orgyenpa and the early Kagyü
tradition,10
nyam shyé tar sön drubpé tulshyuk kyang
And, cherishing the life of a yogin, displayed miracles
dzutrul nga nyé bal bö chö la gyur
That brought Nepalis and Tibetans to the Dharma—
ü nyön heruka la solwa deb
Ü-nyön Heruka,11 I supplicate you.

jampal khyen rab nyima tuk la shar
The sun of Mañjuśrī’s intelligence arose in your mind,
lung rik mawé sengé lok mé tsok
And, with the lion's roar of reasoning and scriptural citation,
zilnön khedrub wangchuk rabjam pa
You outshone those who harboured wrong views—master of learning and spiritual accomplishment,
tenpé gyaltsen shyab la solwa deb
Rabjampa Tenpé Gyaltsen,12 at your feet I supplicate.

dampé tsul gü ngé sang ten chokdzin
With the nine qualities of a sublime being,13 you held the supreme teachings of the definitive
secret,
khyen dang tsewé trinlé pata dal
And, with your wise and loving activity, spread them far and wide—
kunzang tenpé nyima shyé chenpa
Sun of the teachings of Samantabhadra,
nampar gyalwé shyab la solwa deb
Nampar Gyalwa of Shechen,14 at your feet I supplicate.

lab sum namdak khyen tsé nü pé ter
Pure in the three higher trainings,15 a veritable treasure of knowledge, love and ability,
mindrol dütsi kalzang duljé tsok
With the nectar of maturation and liberation, you brought hosts of fortunate disciples
yong min ngepa dön gyi rigpa dzin
To spiritual maturity—awareness-holder of the definitive meaning,
paljor gyatsö shyab la solwa deb
Paljor Gyatso,16 at your feet I supplicate.

orgyen lungten zabmö ter la wang
Prophesied by the master of Oḍḍiyāna as the owner of profound termas,
tulshyuk chöpé bepé né shyal jé
You engaged in yogic conduct and revealed hidden lands.
kyedzok dingden ngak chö gar gyi wang
Lord of the dance, whose yogic conduct arose from deep confidence in the creation and completion
phases,
chö kyi gyaltsen shyab la solwa deb
Chökyi Gyaltsen,17 at your feet I supplicate.

jampal shinjé shé kyi jesu zung
Guided by Mañjuśrī-Yamāntaka,
shyenpen du shyi trinlé sam mikhyab
Your altruistic activities, through the four means of gathering disciples, were inconceivable,18
dreltsé dönden gyurmé ngedön zik
And, having perceived the unchanging truth, you brought benefit to all with a connection—
kunzang tenpé nyimar solwa deb
Kunzang Tenpé Nyima,19 I supplicate you.

lab chen gyalwé sé kyi chöpa yi
A friend, who through the magnificent conduct of a bodhisattva,
tenpa rinchen shying dir nangwé nyen
Caused the precious teachings of Buddha to illuminate this world,
dul ka dul dzé drubpé dorjé dzin
Accomplished vajra holder, subduer of the difficult-to-tame,
tenpé nyimé shyab la solwa deb
Tenpé Nima,20 at your feet I supplicate.

rimé ten drö gön gyur terchen jé
Through the kindness of the gentle protector Rabsel Dawa,21
jam gön rabsal dawé tukkyé kyi
Treasure lord and unbiased protector of the teachings and beings,
ngé drol ngagyur shedrub chuter ché
You became an excellent repository of the accomplishment and explanation of the Ancient Translations
of definite freedom—
yik dzin chö kyi sengér solwa deb
Chökyi Senge,22 at your feet I supplicate.

detar miché güpé soltab tü
Through the power of making this supplication with unshakeable devotion,
tserab trengwar dampé gön nam kyi
May I be guided by the sublime protectors of this garland-like succession of lives
jezung nyepa sum gyi lek nyenpé
And through serving them well through the three means of gratification,23
dön nyi sam kün lhündrub jingyi lob
Grant your blessings, so that all my wishes and the twofold aims may be spontaneously fulfilled.

Sovereign of the teachings of the great secret, lord of all maṇḍalas, and sole refuge, Vajradhara
Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche, wrote a list of the successive lives of Shechen Rabjam in one
of his diaries. My close dharma brother, Tulku Kunga, transcribed it from Rinpoche’s handwriting
and  asked me to compose a corresponding supplication. Merely to avoid turning down
his earnest request, I, Gyurme Shedrup Chökyi Sengye, who holds the title of the Seventh
Rabjam Rinpoche, wrote this on the tenth day of the eleventh month in the year of the Iron
Mouse. May virtue and auspiciousness increase!

| Translated by Sean Price. © Shechen Translations, 2021.
↑ As Mipham Rinpoche expresses them in his Medicine Buddha practice entitled The Excellent Vase
of Amṛta, the four aspirations are as follows: 1) May those in areas of misery never be
without peace and may they lead long and comfortable lives! 2) May the light of the Buddha
bring happiness and joy to the hells! 3) May all enjoy radiance, beauty and riches and
remain unharmed by elemental spirits! 4) May everyone love one another and be without disease!↑
A reference to the transmission of Yamāntaka among the Eight Herukas.↑ I.e,. The space
section (klong sde), mind section (sems sde) and pith-instruction section (man ngag sde).↑
Do here stands for Düpa Do, the root tantra of Anuyoga.↑ Rinchen Chok of Ma was one of
the first seven Tibetans to be ordained, the so-called seven men to be tested (sad mi mi
bdun). He translated the Guhyagarbha Tantra among other texts.↑ A reference to Kamalaśīla’s
famous debate with the Ch’an master Hvashang Mahāyāna at Samyé Monastery.↑ dgyes mdzad lo
tsA ba. An epithet of Marpa Chökyi Lodrö.↑ Rongtön Sheja Künrig (1367–1449).↑ Rinchen Puntsok
Chökyi Gyalpo (1509–1557) of Drikung.↑ I.e., The Three Vajras tradition received by
Orgyenpa Rinchen Pal.↑ Kunga Zangpo (1458–1532).↑ The First Shechen Rabjam, Tenpé Gyaltsen
(1650–1704).↑ The qualities of hearing, reflecting and meditating, which benefit oneself;
teaching, debating and composing, which benefit others; and being learned, ethical and good-hearted,
which benefit both oneself and others.↑ The Second Shechen Rabjam, Gyurme Kunzang
Namgyal (1713–1769).↑ The trainings in ethical discipline, meditative absorption and wisdom.↑
The Third Shechen Rabjam, Paljor Gyatso (1771–1807).↑ The Fourth Shechen Rabjam, Garwang
Chökyi Gyaltsen (1811?–1862).↑ The four means of gathering or attracting disciples
(bsdu ba’i dngos po bzhi) are: 1) being generous; 2) speaking pleasantly; 3) teaching according
to individual needs; and 4) acting in accordance with one’s teaching.↑ The Fifth Shechen
Rabjam, Pema Tekchok Tenpé Gyaltsen, alias Gyurme Kunzang Tenpé Nyima (1864–1909).↑ The
Sixth Shechen Rabjam Rinpoche, Nangdzé Drubpé Dorje, alias Kunzang Tenpé Nyima (1911–1959).↑
Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche (1910–1991).↑ The Seventh Shechen Rabjam Rinpoche, Jigme Chökyi
Senge (b.1966).↑ The three means of pleasing or gratifying the teacher (mnyes pa gsum)
are 1. offering our practice, 2. offering service with body and speech, and 3. material offerings.