The Blissful Path to the Ocean of Bodhicitta
A Brief Prayer of Aspiration for Mind Training
by Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche

pakchok chenrezik wang dang
By the truth of the perfect mind of awakening
sangye changchub sempa nam
Generated by the supreme noble Lord Avalokiteśvara
tuk kyé tarchin denpa yi
And all the buddhas and bodhisattvas,
dakshyen khanyam dro kün la
May the supreme mind of bodhicitta be born
changchub sem chok kyewar shok
In me and in all other beings, as limitless as space.

semchen duk nga la shyuk dang
May the causes and effects of beings' suffering—
rik druk dukngal nyongwa yi
Their involvement with the five poisons,
dukngal gyundré dak la min
And painful experiences in the six classes,
dak gi chin druk sem dang ni
All ripen on me! To them all, as limitless as space,
duk nga mepé getsa nam
I offer the six perfections in my own mind,
namkha nyampé dro la jin
And sources of virtue, free from the five poisons.

rik druk khorwé né tong né
May all the realms of saṃsāra's six classes be emptied,
rik chok druk gi chenrezik
And may everyone attain the level of Avalokiteśvara,
yeshe drukden tobpar shok
In his six sublime families and with six types of wisdom.

né muk tsön kal lokpar té
May all disease, famine, belligerence, wrong views,
nyamchak nyetung dikpé tsok
Impairments, transgressions, downfalls, harmful actions,
chedzin barché dön gek kün
Self-cherishing, obstacles, harmful influences and impediments,
daknyi chikpü tengdu min
All ripen on me and me alone!
tsé pal long chö dekyi tu
And to all these beings, who are as limitless as space
nyamtok khyentsé yeshe kün
I dedicate long-life, glory, wealth, happiness, power,
namkha nyampé dro la ngo
Experience, realisation, and knowing, loving wisdom.
kün kyang changchub chö chok gi
May they all, through supreme enlightened actions,
rab dzé pakpé né tob shok
Attain the level of the most splendid Noble One!

dorna chedzin rang dö lé
In short, may all the causes and effects
jungwé gyundré dak la min
Of egotism and self-cherishing ripen on me!
dro kün pendé pal gyi jor
And may all beings gain a wealth of benefit and happiness,
tongnyi nyingjé dön tok shok
And realise the meaning of emptiness and compassion!

dak la tong tö dren rek gi
May all beings, especially those who harm me, or who have developed a negative connection
ngen drel nöjé tso jé dro
Through seeing, hearing, thinking of, or encountering me,
drib jang changchub lam shyuk né
Purify their obscurations, enter the path to enlightenment,
tokma nyi du tsang gya shok
And attain awakening straightaway!

shin du mi zé lé ngen gyi
May I take the place of those experiencing the cause and effect
nammin gyundré chöpé tsab
Of unbearable, extremely negative acts,
daknyi gyur né dedak kün
And may they all purify obscurations
drib jang dechen shying kyé shok
And be born in realms of perfect bliss!

nöjé tsor gyur dro kün dön
For the sake of all, but especially those who harm me,
daknyi ngensong khonar né
May I remain only in the lower realms,
magen dro kün khor tso lé
And may all beings, my very own mothers,
drol né namdrol sar jor shok
Escape samsara's ocean to reach liberation's shore.

changchub sem kyi shyi chikpu
The only basis for bodhicitta—
dra dön kadrinchen khyö kyi
Kind enemies and harmful forces—
chirdu dak gi lü dang sok
For your sake, I shall gladly give away
ga shyin tang né pen drub shok
My body and my life—may you be benefitted!

daknyi ngön sangyé pé tsé
When I attain complete enlightenment,
khor gyi tokmar khyö kyé né
May you become the first in my circle,
nga dé zangpo düpa shyin
And, just like the five original disciples,
möla tamché khyen tob shok
Attain omniscience there and then!

di né changchub matob bar
From now until I attain enlightenment,
nöjé khyé dang mindral shying
May I never be apart from you who do me harm,
trukpa mepé tachö kyi
And with calm, untroubled view and conduct,
changchub lam la nyam juk shok
May we set out together on the path to enlightenment.

tong tö drenpa tachi mö
May those who see me, hear me or think of me,
dak gi ming tsam töpa dang
And also those who merely hear my name,
dzi chok lung gi rekpa yang
Or are simply touched by the same breath of wind,
drib zé shyiwé lam juk shok
Discard their obscurations and enter the way to peace!

pamar gyurpé khakhyab dro
All beings are my own parents, as limitless as space,
dangwé yul du jitar ö
So how could I ever feel hostility towards them?
drin zö samjor jampo yi
Wishing only to repay their kindness, and acting gently,
chamchik sangye sar jor shok
May I bring them, all at once, to enlightenment!

dak la ten né ngö gyü du
May beings never be harmed on my account,
semchen kün la nö magyur
Whether directly or indirectly,
pen dang dewa bashyik gi
And, through bringing them only benefit and happiness,
dechen sa la gö nü shok
May I lead them all to the state of perfect bliss!

kechik rer yang pakmé dro
In each and every instant, may all limitless beings,
drolwé tabkhé nyingjé tu
With skill in the means of liberation and the force of compassion,
chenrezik dang jampé yang
Become just like Avalokiteśvara, Mañjuśrī,
sangwé dakpo tabur shok
And Vajrapāṇi, the Lord of Secrets.

khyepar dul ka dukngal chen
May those who suffer and are difficult to tame,
lhakpar tsewé jedzin la
Receive special loving care and guidance,
tubpa chok dang pejung gi
And may the compassionate prayers and aspirations
tuk kyé mönlam shyin gyur chik
Of the Supreme Sage and the Lotus Born come true!

dakshyen nyamnyi yeshe ying
In the wisdom space of the equality of self and other,
tongnyi nyingjé tsal sharwé
Through the dawning of emptiness and compassion's power,
shyenpen bashyik drubjé chir
Just so the benefit of others may be secured,
mönlam tab shyin nyur drub shok
May this prayer of aspiration swiftly be fulfilled!

This aspiration prayer for seeing adverse conditions as supports on the path to enlightenment
encapsulates the words of the Jamgön Lama1 and was written by Lodrö Drimé Ziji Rabtu Gawé
Pal, a mendicant heir to the victorious buddhas, who ardently and devotedly follows the
Mahāyāna path, as a result of the kindness of the perfect buddha of Shechen (i.e., Shechen
Gyaltsab), who was a master of wondrous bodhicitta and a crowning jewel for beings in this
degenerate age.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2015. With thanks to Po-yu Sung for providing the Tibetan text
and a draft translation.

Version: 1.2-20220215
↑ A reference to The Gateway to the Ocean of Bodhicitta (byang sems rgya mtsho'i 'jug ngogs)
by Jamgön Kongtrul Lodrö Thayé.