The Vidyādharas' Words of Truth
An Aspiration Connected with the Stages of the Path of the Three Roots, from the Heart Essence
of the Vast Expanse
by Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche

kunzang dorjé sempa garab jé
Samantabhadra, Vajrasattva, Garab Dorje,
rabjam gyalwé chizuk pema jung
Padmākara—embodiment of infinite buddhas,
jebang drok sum künkhyen yabsé sok
King, subject and companion,1 Omniscient Father and Son,2
kabab gyü sum rigdzin gong su sol
And vidyādharas of the three lineages of transmission—pray grant me your attention!

gonggyü yeshe ngöntsol lama jé
Lordly gurus, who confer wisdom’s direct transmission
sang sum gyutrul dorjé köpé trin
And whose three secrets are the billowing arrays of the Illusory Net,
palchen kadü shyitro rabjam dang
Infinite peaceful and wrathful deities of the Collected Teachings of the Awesome Ones,
khar chen daki wangchuk gong su sol
And Kharchen, mistress of ḍākinīs, pray grant me your attention!

döné lhündrub nyukmé dorjé sum
May the three vajras of my original state, spontaneously present from the very beginning,
gyaltab chiluk wang shyi min jepé
Be matured by the four empowerments of the vase that confers majesty;
kyilkhor nam shyi lam la juk nüpé
May I thereby gain the ability to enter the four maṇḍalas
dorjé rik kyi kalpa chok drub shok
And accomplish the supreme fortune of the vajra family.

si lé ngejung ngöndrö lam tar sön
May I perfect the path of the preliminaries by renouncing existence,
shyenpen lo yi tekchen lam tsa tsuk
Establish the foundation of the Great Vehicle through altruism,
sak dang jangwé gyü dak khyepardu
Cleanse my mind by means of accumulation and purification
mögü tarchin tuk yi chik dré shok
And, with consummate devotion in particular, cause my mind and the guru’s wisdom to merge as
one.

tingdzin nga dang gabpa nam shyi yi
Through the five samādhis and four hidden instructions,
nöchü lamar shepé kyerim dang
The generation phase that perceives the world and inhabitants as the guru
tuk yi chik dré zabmö dzokrim gyi
And the profound perfection phase whereby mind and wisdom merge as one,
yo tob gom ten nyam nga tarchin shok
May I master the five experiences of movement, attainment, familiarity, stability and perfection.

nyengyü yishyin norbü dzokrim dang
Through the perfection stage of the Wish-Fulfilling Jewel of the Oral Lineage
ma gom sangye ponyé lam nyur gyi
And the swift path of the messenger-consort known as Buddhahood Without Meditation,
rigdzin nam shyi gopang delak drub
May I easily attain the four stages of the vidyādharas
sa chu lam ngé yönten tar sön shok
And perfect the qualities of the ten stages and five paths.

khyepar tek chok shintu naljor gyi
In particular, by the power of purifying body, speech and mind
chinang rushen go sum jangwé tü
Through the Supreme Vehicle’s Atiyoga practices of separating3 saṃsāra and nirvāṇa on both outer
and inner levels
sem rik shenjé chok shyak shyi tawa
May I distinguish4 mind from awareness, abide in the view by means of the four ways of leaving
things as they are,5
ösal drön druk gompé bokyung té
Enhance my experience by meditating on the six lamps of luminosity,
ösal nang shyi nyamlen tar sön né
Perfect the practice of the four visions of luminosity
jalü dorjé gopang ngöngyur shok
And actualize the stage of the indestructible rainbow body!

tongwé chö la drolwé kal men na
If I lack the fortune to be liberated in this life
bardo sum du shyi long drolwa dang
May I be freed within the expanse of the ground in any of the three intermediate states,
rangshyin trulpé shying drö trinlé tü
Arrive at a natural nirmāṇakāya pure realm, and, through the force of my enlightened activity,
dro kün dömé sa la kyel nü shok
Be able to deliver all beings to the primordial state!

The old man called Jigme Khyentse Özer, who roams this world and is a servant of the teachings
of the Omniscient Kings of Dharma, Father and Son, wrote this while practising a great
accomplishment ritual of Do Tsokchen Düpa at the new temple of Shechen Tennyi Dargye Ling.
It was composed at the request of Choktrul Tendzin Trinle Künkhyab, who is adorned with nectar-like
qualities of learning and realization, for the benefit of the inhabitants of Lhasa,
the capital of the Snowy Land of Tibet, whose inhabitants are filled with great faith,
devotion and compassion. May this offering become the cause for gaining the strength to
act for the benefit of the wisdom mind teachings of Samantabhadra!

| Translated by Han Kop and reviewed by Sean Price, 2021, for the Longchen Nyingtik Project.
With gratitude to Tulku Dawa Rinpoche and Khenpo Sonam Tsewang for their clarifications.

Source: 'Jigs med gling pa. "rdzogs pa chen po klong chen snying thig gi rtsa ba gsum gyi lam
rim dang 'brel ba'i smon lam rig pa 'dzin pa'i bden tshig", in klong chen snying thig rtsa
pod. 5 Vols. BDRC W1KG13585. Bodhnath, Kathmandu and Bodhgaya, Bihar: Shechen Publications,
1994. Vol. 5: 1005–1006.
↑ I.e., King Trisong Detsen, Vairotsana and Yeshe Tsogyal.↑ I.e., Longchenpa and Jigme Lingpa.↑
Tib. Rushen.↑ Tib. shenjé (shan ‘byed).↑ Tib. cog bzhag bzhi.