The Sun of Ambrosial Wisdom
A Guru Yoga of Dharmarāja Sakya Paṇḍita
by Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche

The Outer Practice:
a nangsi namdak womin dechen shying
Ah! Where all that appears and exists is completely pure, Akaniṣṭha, the realm of great bliss—
köpa rab dzé rang dün chötrin ü
Before me, amidst a ravishing display of cloud-like offerings,
jampé yang ngö sakya pandita
Is Mañjughoṣa in person, Sakya Paṇḍita Kunga Gyaltsen.
kün ga gyaltsen tsenpé shyön tsul dzé
Youthful and handsome, adorned with all the enlightened marks,
ngurmik chögö sum gyi dzepar lub
And attractively clothed in three saffron dharma robes,
chak nyi tukkar chö ché chakgya lé
At his heart his two hands form the Dharma-teaching mudrā.
pedong zung teng raldri lekbam nam
Both hold lotus stalks, upon which rest a sword and a scripture,
shyab nyi dorjé kyiltrung pé dé teng
His legs are vajra-crossed, and he is seated upon a lotus and moon.
gyé dzum tsewé chen gyi dak la zik
Smiling with delight, he looks upon me with love.
tukké pal ber yeshe sempé tsul
As the glorious jñānasattva in his heart,
jampal shyönnu marser ral pöchen
Youthful Mañjuśrī, orange, with scripture and sword,
dorjé kyiltrung özer bum gyi khyü
Sits with legs in vajra posture, enveloped in myriad rays of light.
longkü chechen tukkar da teng dhih
With all saṃbhogakāya attributes, upon a moon in his heart is dhīḥ,
marser nyima jewé zijin bar
Blazing with the orange brilliance of a billion suns.
khor du sé ché gyalwé kyilkhor shyuk
Around him is a maṇḍala of buddhas and bodhisattvas.
sangye kün gyi yeshe ku changwa
He possesses the wisdom kāya of all the buddhas.
palden lamar dé gyé chak gi dü
Bowing with devotion to the glorious guru, I prostrate a hundred times,
nangsi kunzang chötrin gyé gur bul
I offer all that delights within appearance and existence as clouds of Samantabhadra’s offerings,
mi shedrib pé nongpa tol lo shak
I regret mistakes due to obscured ignorance and confess them,
khordé gé tsok gyatsor jé yi rang
And I rejoice in the ocean of virtues gathered in saṃsāra and nirvāṇa,
drimé zabgyé chökhor korwar kul
I enjoin you to turn the wheel of stainless Dharma, profound and vast,
dro kham jisi dorjé kur shyuk né
And to remain in the vajra body for as long as wandering beings exist:
khakhyab yichen sishyi lé drol shying
Please free beings from existence and peace as far as the reaches of space,
dzok min jang tar sönpar dzé du sol
And bring completion, maturation and training to perfection!
khyö ni sé ché gyalwa kün gyi yab
You, father of all victors and their bodhisattva heirs,
nyimé yeshe kuchen jampé yang
Have the form of non-dual wisdom, Mañjuśrī.
namtar samyé chok dü drenpé ngak
Your inconceivable life and liberation, a guide for all places and times, I praise.
yönten jesu drenpé solwa deb
Remembering your qualities, I pray.
dak gi nying ü pemé gesar tser
Within my heart, atop a blossoming lotus flower,
gyepé tsen zang ngönsum kö né kyang
With excellent, delightful marks, truly adorned,
gönpo khyö kyi namtar jishyin du
Just as you have done in your life and liberation, O Protector,
chö nü jinlab ten dir tsal du sol
Please bestow on us, your disciples, your conduct, power and blessings!
Then, the prayer spoken by the master himself:1

sheja tamché zikpé chen yang shing
In your expansive vision, you see all that can be known,
dro kün gelek drubpé tukjé chen
In your compassion, you accomplish virtue and goodness for all beings,
samyé trinlé dzépé tob ngawa
In your power, you perform activities beyond comprehension,
jamgön lamé shyab la solwa deb
At the feet of the teacher Mañjunātha, Gentle Lord, I pray!
Thus, pray with one-pointed trust.

chöjé tukkar da teng dhih marser
In the heart of the Dharmarāja, an orange dhīḥ rests upon a moon,
yigé drukpa dé jé ngak kyi kor
Surrounded by the six-syllable vajra mantra.
özer trodü dro kün drib nyi jang
Light-rays shine out and then gather, purifying all beings' two obscurations,
sangye changsem gyü kul khyen nü tsé
And invoking the mind-streams of buddhas and bodhisattvas,
jinlab özer dü né tukkar tim
Light-rays imbued with the blessings of wisdom, power and love gather and dissolve into the
heart.
ku lé sam mi khyabpé özer gyi
From your form, inconceivable light rays
rang gi lü gang nedön dikdrib dak
Fill my own body, and purify spiritual and physical sickness, negativities and obscurations.
mi shé dri jang dakmé neluk dön
With impurities of ignorance cleansed, wisdom which realizes
tokpé yeshe gyü la kyepar gyur
The meaning of selflessness, the natural state, arises within the mind.

om a ra pa tsa na dhih
oṃ arapacana dhīḥ
Recite this as much as you can. At the end of the session:

lamé ku lé yeshe dütsi gyün
From the guru’s form, ambrosial wisdom
marser dewa chenpö nampa jung
Pours forth as an orange stream of great bliss,
chitsuk né shyuk lü kün gangwa dang
It enters the crown of the head and fills the whole body,
ku sung tuk kyi jinlab ngö su shyuk
And blessings of enlightened body, speech, and mind are truly received.
lü ngak yi kyi dribpa malü dak
All obscurations of body, speech and mind purified,
lama jampé dorjé sang sum dang
The three vajra secrets of Guru Mañjuśrī,
nyisu mepé kalzang ngön du gyur
And the good fortune of non-duality are actualized.
lama khor ché ö shyu rang la tim
The guru and entourage melt into light and dissolve into me.
döné kyegak nedral sem kyi shi
The ground of mind is primordially free from arising, ceasing and abiding.
nyimé yeshe pungpor drepa yi
Non-dual wisdom suffuses the aggregates.
wang dang ngödrub tamché tobpar sam
All empowerments and siddhis are obtained.
nangtong gyumé ku yi shying künkhyab
All realms are pervaded by illusory forms, empty yet appearing.
nampa tamché tek sum chö dra drok
All sounds at all times proclaim the three vehicles’ Dharma.
khyen tsé nü pa pakyé jam gön jé
May we enjoy the glorious three secrets of Lord Protector Mañjuśrī,
sangwa sum gyi pal la chö gyur chik
His wisdom, love and power beyond measure!

Due to the requests of those who closely rely upon extraordinary wisdom, realization and qualities,
Tulku Trinlé Nyima (Sun of Activity), and Dokya Tulku Chökyi Nyima (Dharma Sun), the
invalid of little worth who's attained but a fraction of the blessing of Dharmarāja Mañjuśrī,
Jikmé Khyentsé Özer Lodrö Drimé Zijé Rabgé Pal, wrote this in the monastery of Ritsé
Dali Gön in Dorjé Ling (Darjeeling), within the noble land of India, and there made prayers.
May it be meaningful!

First requested by the daybreak of the Sun of Activity,
And in dependence upon the rising Dharma Sun,
By this guru yoga, which is the wisdom sun,
May the sun of the Buddha’s teachings shine, freed of veils!

Maṅgalaṃ! Virtue!

| Translated by Peter Woods and edited with the help of Stefan Mang, 2017.
↑ This four-line prayer to Mañjuśrī, which appears at the beginning of Sakya Paṇḍita’s Tsema
Rikter (Tshad ma rigs gter), was later adopted as a prayer to Sakya Paṇḍita himself.