The Potent Nectar of Accomplishment
A Prayer and Supplication to the Vidyādhara Gurus of the Three Lineages1
by Shechen Rabjam Rinpoche

shyi ying gyurmé chöku kuntuzang
The unchanging basic space of the ground is the dharmakāya Samantabhadra;
shyi nang longku yeshe rik ngé trin
Its appearances, saṃbhogakāya, are cloud-like formations, the wisdom of the five buddha families;
drodul rik sum gonggyü lama la
And the three emanated lineages2 destined to benefit beings are the gurus of the mind lineage
–
solwa deb so jinlab char chen pob
I supplicate you: please shower down a great rain of blessings!

trulpé rigdzin garab shiri sing
The emanated vidyādharas: Garab Dorje, Śrī Siṃha,
gyal kün ngowo pejung bimala
Padmasambhava, who is the embodiment of all buddhas, Vimalamitra,
drubpé rigdzin tsal chang nam gyé la
And the eight highly accomplished and powerful vidyādhara masters3  –
solwa deb so jinlab char chen pob
I supplicate you: please shower down a great rain of blessings!

chögyal yabsé bairo namnying bang
The Dharma King, Trisong Detsen, and sons; Vairotsana, Namkhai Nyingpo, and other loyal subjects;
ying chuk yum ngé namrol khandro nga
Dhātviśvarī, Queen of Space, and the other awakened ones, whose play is as five ḍākinī consorts,4
kabab nyengyü rigdzin tsok ché la
Together with the assembly of awareness-holders who have the fortune to receive the oral tradition
–
solwa deb so jinlab char chen pob
I supplicate you: please shower down a great rain of blessings!

nyang gur künkhyen yabsé nga pen jé
Omniscient father and [spiritual] son, Nyangrel Nyima Özer and Guru Chöwang;
jang dak dorjé tokmé chöjé ling
Ngari Paṇchen, Jangdak, Dorje Thokme, Chöje Lingpa,
khyentsé wang sok namrol samyé la
Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo,5 and the rest – limitless emanations defying the imagination –
solwa deb so jinlab char chen pob
I supplicate you: please shower down a great rain of blessings!

gyurmé gyal kün ngowo rik kyi dak
Unchanging lord of all buddha families – in essence you are all buddhas –
nyikdü tek chok kater shedrub gön
In these decadent times you were the protector of the supreme vehicle’s long and short lineages.6
tenpé gyaltsen dzin kün tsuk gi gyen
You are the crown ornament of all who hold the victory banner of the buddhas’ teaching7  –
solwa deb so jinlab char chen pob
I supplicate you: please shower down a great rain of blessings!

jamgön khyentsé trinlé rangwang gyur
Sovereign, the very activity of Jamgön Khyentse,
künzik pema yeshe dorjé dang
Renowned as the omniscient Pema Yeshe Dorje;8
bairö namrol trulshyik dharmé tsen
And the emanation of Vairotsana, Trulshik Dharmamati –
solwa deb so trinlé char chen pob
I supplicate you: please shower down a great rain of blessings!

rabjam chö tsul gyatsö nö du gyur
A vessel for the oceanic ways of dharma in all their immensity,9
shedrub chö kyi sengé tsen gyi pü
You are renowned as a veritable lion of the dharma of learning and accomplishment.10
chödak uk yung gong gyü jinlab tob
Confirmed as the custodian of these teachings, you received the blessing of the wisdom mind
transmission.
solwa deb so jinlab chok ngö tsol
I supplicate you: please shower down a great rain of blessings!

ku chok jampal sung chok tsé yi lha
Supreme body, Mañjuśrī; speech, the deities of life;
tuk chok yangdak yönten lamé tsok
Mind, Yangdak Heruka; quality, the various Guru cycles;
trinlé purpa zab yang gongpé ter
And supreme activity, Kīlaya – mind treasures, profound and vast –
kyilkhor gyatsö tsok la solwa deb
Deities of their oceanic maṇḍalas, I supplicate you!

zakché khorwé yul la mi chakpar
With no desire for the tainted objects of saṃsāra,
lam gyi tünkyen dom sum nampar dak
Upholding the three sets of vows – the concordant condition of the path –
dé tsön drakpö tö sam mik nyé né
And, having found an eye for study and reflection through fierce devotion and endeavor,
shyiwé né su drub la shyolwar shok
May I devote myself to practice in peaceful isolation.

shyi gyü changchub sem kyi shyingsa len
May I moisten the field of being, the primordial ground, with bodhicitta;
lam gyü mindrol ku shyi sabön teb
Plant the seeds of the four kāyas through the path of ripening and liberation;
rim nyi lam gyi drötak tarchin né
And perfect the signs of warmth on the path of the two stages
dré gyü lhündrub rigdzin ngöngyur shok
To reveal the resultant state, the innate and spontaneous state of a vidyādhara.

nekab su yang dön nyi drubpa la
Until that time, may there be no outer, inner, or secret obstacle
chi nang sangwé barché minjung shying
When accomplishing the twofold aim of self and other.
nemé tsering sam gu yishyin drub
With my life long and free of illness, may I accomplish everything I wish for,
nyamtok rigpé tsal chen bar gyur chik
And may the expression of awareness blaze forth as experience and realization.

di la zang ngen ledrel shi sön kün
May all those with whom I’m karmically connected, whether positively or negatively, be they
dead or alive,
rangnang trulpa bardö jiktrak la
Come to recognize the seemingly terrifying appearances of the intermediate (bardo) state as
the appearances of confusion;
rang ngoshé né nang ché tob sum gyi
Realizing them to be their own self-display, may they experience them as ‘appearance, increase
and attainment’
rangnang dakpé ku sum ngöngyur shok
And render evident the pure three kāyas.

rigdzin lamé tuk kyi dangmé chü
The pure concentrated essences of the Vidyādhara Guru’s wisdom-heart
chö chok drimé zabmo gongpé ter
Are the sublime dharmas of his pure and profound mind treasures.
jikten künkhyab kün kyang nö gyur né
May they spread throughout the entire world and be well received,
ngö gyü rigdzin sa la uk yung shok
Bringing everyone, directly and indirectly, to the state of an awareness-holder.

nöchü güpé nyé tsok kün shyi shying
May the decline and shortcomings of this world and its inhabitants be arrested.
tsesö wang lung nyamtok ngang gi gyé
May longevity, merit, charisma, wind-horse, experience and spiritual realization increase.
kham sum chegü lungsem rangwang dü
May the wind-mind of all who rank highly within the three realms be brought under control,
mitün dragek yong drol tashi shok
And usher in the auspiciousness that is liberation from all adversity, hostility and obstructing
forces.

When I had completed the arrangements for several of Jamgön Lama Rabsel Dawa’s profound Mind
Treasures (gongter), which include manuals of accomplishment, empowerment and activity, the
practice-master with peerless devotion and endeavor, Ven. Lungrik Nyima, said that there
was a need for a prayer and supplication that could be used in the practice of Kyabje Rinpoche’s
profound termas, accompanying his request with three tola of gold. So as not to refuse
this request I, the one who holds the name of Shechen Rabjam Tulku and who is confirmed
as the owner of these profound dharmas, composed and offered this prayer and supplication
on the nineteenth day of the eighth month in the year of the Iron Mouse (6 October, 2020)
– the anniversary of the parinirvāṇa of the Great Tertön Guru. May virtue and excellence
abound.

| Translated by Lama Sean Price. © Shechen Publications, 2020. Reproduced here with the kind
permission of Rabjam Rinpoche.
↑ The mind-to-mind lineage of the awakened ones (Buddha), the symbolic lineage of the vidyādharas
and the oral lineage of ordinary people.↑ Avalokiteśvara, Mañjuśrī and Vajrapāṇi.↑ The
eight vidyādharas of India who each mastered one of the Eight Herukas and passed their
lineages to Guru Rinpoche: Vimalamitra, Hūṃkāra, Mañjuśrīmitra, Nāgārjuna, Prabhāhasti, Dhanasaṃskṛta,
Rambuguhya/Rombuguhya, and Śāntigarbha. ↑ The five consorts of Guru Rinpoche:
Yeshe Tsogyal, Mandāravā, Śākyadevī, Kālasiddhī and Tashi Khyidren.↑ There are the five emanations
of King Trisong Deutsen (Five Tertön Kings): related to awakened body, Nyangrel
Nyima Özer; speech, Guru Chöwang; mind, Ngari Paṇchen Pema Wangyal; qualities, Jangdak Tashi
Topgyal; activity, Dorje Thokme Tsal (the Fifth Dalai Lama) along with Chöje Lingpa, the
last of the Thirteen Great Tertöns, and the embodiment of them all, Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo—all
previous lives of Kyabje Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche.↑ The long lineage of kama and the
short lineage of terma.↑ This verse incorporates the syllables of one of Kyabje Dilgo Khyentse
Rinpoche’s names: Gyurme Thekchok Tenpe Gyaltsen (which was given by Shechen Gyaltsab).↑
Dzongsar Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö (1893–1959).↑ This verse incorporates the syllables of
Rabjam Rinpoche’s name. In this line, immensity translates Rabjam.↑ Shedrup Chökyi Senge,
Rabjam Rinpoche’s personal name.