Wisdom’s Melody
An Aspiration to Realize Madhyamaka, Mahāmudrā, and Mahā Ati
by Kyabje Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche

tubwang nyesé kunzang dorjé chang
Samantabhadra, Vajradhara, and you, Mighty Sage, together with your close disciples
könchok tsa sum chösung gyatsö tsok
And oceanic deities of the Three Jewels, Three Roots, and dharmapālas—
tsungmé lama drubtob gyatso yi
Incomparable Gurus in whom the three secrets of myriad siddhas are primordially perfected:
sang sum döné dzok kün gong su sol
Pray listen!

dé dang ngejung nyingjé sherab kyi
Having purified myself with the common and extraordinary preliminary practices:
chok sum kyab ten shyenpen samjor gyi
Cultivating faith, renunciation, compassion, and wisdom;
tünmong tünmin khyepar ngöndro jong
With reliance upon the refuge of the Three Jewels, and the altruistic wish to benefit others,
gyalwa gyepé lam la jukpar shok
May I enter the path pleasing to the victors!

döndam chö kün neluk tongpanyi
The ultimate, essential nature of everything is emptiness,
kündzob tsenmé tenjung chir nang yang
And the obscuring nature, devoid of self-characteristics, can arise interdependently as anything
whatsoever.
zungjuk tadral mönpa mepé ying
Their union lies beyond all extremes and is the dhātu beyond aspiration—
tek chok umé tawa ngöngyur shok
May I actualize the Middle Way view of the supreme vehicle!

rangbab sum gyi semnyi lhenkyé tok
Through the threefold natural occurrence the co-emergence of mind itself is realized;
kyön shyi rangdrol nyamnyong naljor shyi
Experiencing the self-liberation of the four faults is the fourfold yoga.
ku shyi rang la dzokpé deng nyé né
Having found the deep confidence that the four kāyas are perfected within me,
gompa chakgya chenpo tokpar shok
May I realize the meditation of Mahāmudrā!

nang sem riktong gyumé chotrul la
To realize the magical display of illusion, of appearance and mind as empty awareness,
kyé dé tab drol nyurlam né du dek
Is to strike the vital point of the swift path of creation, recitation, method, and liberation;
kyiduk lamkhyer khordé chökur shar
To see saṃsāra and nirvāṇa arise as the dharmakāya is to take both happiness and suffering as
the path.
ronyom chöpé bokdön gek sel shok
May I dispel obstacles and enhance the practice through the conduct of single-taste!

yichö tsen dzin kadak ying su drol
Having liberated preoccupation with thought and hankering after self-characteristics into the
primordially pure dhātu,
lhündrub nang shyi zakpa rang sar zé
The four visions of spontaneous presence exhaust contamination whence it lies.
chöying shyönnu bumkur tensi zin
May I win the citadel of the dharmadhātu, the youthful kāya within a vase,
drebu dzogchen nang shyi ngöngyur shok
And achieve the four visions of the resultant Great Perfection!

khakhyab dro kün jedzin tukjé nyur
With swift compassion for all beings throughout space,
dul ka dul la tabkhé nü tob tsen
And to obtain the potential, ability, methods, and knowledge to tame those difficult ones —
dön nyi lhündrub mejung drubtob ché
Bringing about the amazing twofold spontaneous benefit —
namtar jishyin dak gi ngöngyur shok
May I emulate the awe-inspiring siddhas of the past!

Whilst explaining the Heart-Essence of the Lordly and Most Majestic of Siddhas (Druptop Chenpö’i
Tuktik), I gave rise to a strong faith and conviction in the key vajra points of the
profound secret. I thought of the great fortune that would ensue if I and all others could
at least aspire to practise such a path. As such, I, Maṅgala, a beggar from Dokham, wrote
this in the hidden land of fruits, Sikkim. May it prove meaningful! Virtue!

| Translated by Sean Price, 2015.